 Final Meeting Notes December 1, 2011 / 9 a.m. – 2 p.m. / Burlington with Web-X, Call Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Meeting Notes Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT ON THE CALL Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Ira McDaniel by phone, Mel Walters, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Bill Richardson by phone (RMEF); Chris Madson by phone (NWIF); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Darius Heggins, guest, and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA) 2012 MEETING DATES: DECISION: None today. ACTION ITEMS  Tony Send reminder to TRIGgers to update the TRIG / BRCC Representatives Listing  All Ensure your representative and contact info are correct  Chris M Connect with Tony to coordinate Tribal access on acquired lands  Tony Post the DNR Part 2 application to the FTP site  Tony Consult with Steve Desimone (WDFW) re: the Goshawk nest survey  Tony Work with Bill to extend the RMEF contract  Tony/Ira Create a draft prioritization of the previously-reviewed properties discussed today; distribute to TRIG in a confidential email for review and feedback  All There is still time to weigh in on the Carex flava mgmt plan. Please comment by 12/14 PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS:  Tony Add detail to the Burpee Hill spreadsheet to show which activities are required in year one  Cary/Greta Update TRIG re: accounting process for Late Seral Forest money and TERF fund  Tony, Haley, Scott - Compile list of suggested monitoring goals and activities related to Article 514, develop a draft plan for TRIG to review / edit (Tony: elk; Scott: wetlands; Haley: forest)  Marty Modify pre-acquisition data collection forms to include percent cover estimates for dominant overstory trees on potential elk forage forested stands, as well as notation of other overstory and understory species (for use in legacy wood). Modify understory data collection to include estimates of percent cover of salal, sword fern, Oregon grape w/in elk forage stands.  Ira, Tony Prepare “straw dog” proposal for access on acquired lands  Cary, Stan Coordinate meeting between PSE and the Tribes regarding access on acquired lands BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE AND UPDATES ON PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS The BRCC has not met since the TRIG’s last meeting. Cary provided a high-level review of the most recent BRCC update. PSE provides monthly email updates on Resource / Working Group activities to members of the BRCC. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. In-person meetings are scheduled semi-annually. The next in-person meeting is slated for next April. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Page 1 of 5 Tony noted that there have been many personnel changes in recent months and said he will send out the TRIG representative list soon to ask the signatories to confirm that the representative and contact information listed for each organization is correct. Please watch for that email and respond accordingly. Tony also let the group know that Will Wharton, PSE’s financial analyst for the Baker project, had his last day yesterday (he was with us on a temporary assignment). We now have Lisa Salton, who is familiar to some TRIGgers from her work on the Snoqualmie project. Tony will have updated year-end financials available when we meet next. Cary and Greta are meeting next week to talk about the Late Seral Forest money and other articles related to USFS actions. Folks asked whether the USFS work would move forward despite the recent retirements. Cary will ask. If the USFS can’t do any of the actions that are “theirs” to lead (ex: Mountain Goats), Stan asked that the TRIG have an opportunity to talk about how else the work could be accomplished (rather than just automatically move the money into the TERF fund). Tony also let the TRIG know that he attended the RRG / Law Enforcement meeting in October. He gave them an update on TRIG acquisitions. While at the meeting, Tony learned that law enforcement officers removed a pot grow operation from the Burpee Hill property years ago; the officer urged folks to be cautious when out there since ‘shady characters’ sometimes frequent the area. Tony projected a draft list of species for the upland forage and wetland seed mixes. He noted that the draft incorporates species from several other elk forage lists, including those from RMEF and Laura Potash Martin. Brock emphasized the importance of using native plants, especially in wetlands and Kathy went through the listing to clarify which are native. Bill suggested adding a fescue to increase the season length of forage availability. Kathy was also asked to review the status of Smooth Brome. She conducted research at the break and learned that while there is a native version of this, there are some serious warnings about invasiveness. The TRIG agreed not to add this species to the list. Chris M. agreed with the list as amended. Chris reported that the Tribes are looking at doing a clover trap and radio collaring activity this winter/spring (Jan – April). They might like to use the acquired lands as one of their sites. Chris will coordinate with Tony. POST-ACQUISITON ACTIVITIES, ALDER CREEK Tony reminded the group that Step 1 (existing environmental conditions) of the DNR Long-Term Application (LTA) was submitted last summer. The DNR’s Interdisciplinary (ID) Team conducted a site visit, verified the TRIG’s work, and approved the application. Step 2 primarily focuses the proposed activities (road work, harvests, etc.) and was developed taking into account comments and concerns from the ID team and DNR re: Step 1. Tony walked the group through the Step 2 application, which was submitted about a month ago (November 4th). He pointed out that all the proposed harvests are outside wetlands as well as our extended buffers. He also noted that Elizabeth Dubreuil (Cultural Resources team lead) has reviewed the planned activities and put them forward to the CRAG for a 30-day review. All of the cultural sites are historic (old logging and R/R grades, a campsite, and old fruit trees from a farm), not Native America/archaeological. Tony and Elizabeth aren’t expecting any concerns and are developing methods to preserve the cultural sites. Tony expects to hear back from DNR about Step 2 by mid-December. Brock added that DNR’s ID Team was very impressed with the quality of the work. Tony thanked everyone for their work and site visits that made this possible. Tony also reported on a recent site visit with a timber management contractor. They will submit a proposal for re-grading the access to the meadow and for clearing the “Christmas tree” area. This work, brush BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 12/1/11Notes, Page 2 of 5 management, and maybe some harvest work (if revenue neutral/positive) are the O&M projects planned for Alder Creek in 2012. POST-ACQUISITON ACTIVITIES, BURPEE HILL Tony projected the Burpee Hill draft year one activities spreadsheet. He pointed out that the access roadwork and gates were done (completed in October) with capital dollars as part of the acquisition. The Giant Knotweed treatment has also been done, per the TRIG’s agreement at the August 2011 meeting. He commented that the Burpee Hill Program Document (due within one year of acquisition, so due June 2012) will be based on a template from the Alder Creek Program Document. Goals for 2012: Tony noted that he is hoping to be able to accomplish streams, wetlands, roads, steep slope, GIS mapping, and cultural work this next spring/summer. Development of DNR permits may need to wait for the next infusion of Elk O&M money in October. Scott will be coordinating site visits in the spring to conduct amphibian egg mass surveys (this work is charged to the wetlands budget). He will announce the dates; all are welcome to participate in the surveys. Tony also noted that they will be surveying in June to confirm whether the Goshawk nest is occupied. Tony will consult with Steve Desimone (WDFW) for guidance. Haley added that there would likely be a Legacy Wood assessment; that information will be added to the Burpee Hill Program Document (not a separate plan, as was done with Alder Creek). Tony also plans to contact Mark Hitchcock regarding a harvest management plan in the hopes that a revenue-positive harvest may be possible. Tony will extend an invitation for folks to participate in the stream mapping next spring (fun work!). The group talked about the difference between the Burpee Hill site and Alder Creek site. Burpee Hill is 400 acres, mostly managed for forage (vs. 276 acres at Alder Creek with greater percentages of wetlands and less harvestable land). It was noted that it makes sense to think about a harvest plan rather than just a forage plan for this site. Bill agreed that harvest can generate revenue to support management goals. Additionally, he commented that there are management options that can extend the early seral period to support forage for a longer period of time. Lewis River actions may provide some relevant lessons learned. Brock asked for the opportunity for TRIG to review the costs and habitat benefits of alternatives (comparing rotational harvest vs. creation of permanent forage, for example). Tony confirmed that he will ask Mark H. to keep this in mind; Brock confirmed that high-level cost comparisons would be fine. LEGACY WOOD UPDATE AND IMPLEMENTATION DOCUMENT Haley pointed out areas on the Alder Creek east parcel map where Legacy Wood actions are underway. She reviewed the tree selection protocol and showed a map of the trees selected during a site visit with Brock. Five of the seven snag sites have been completed and she showed photos of the work. The other two sites are slated to be finished this weekend. She noted that the snag creation methodology was reviewed by an arborist. There was celebration around the table at the completion of these first management activities on the Alder Creek site! Comments are due today on the Legacy Wood Implementation Document. This is our local document (does not require FERC approval for updates) and acts as a bridge between the FERC-submitted plan and the property-specific prescriptions within each property’s Program Document. Haley noted that Greta sent an email indicating USFS concurrence. Brock has some comments yet to be submitted. Once Haley and Brock talk, Haley will incorporate the comments and send the document out with the goal of getting TRIG approval (maybe by email) in the next month or so. LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Tony noted that PSE’s contract with RMEF is up and asked if TRIG and RMEF wish to continue the contract, which covers Ray’s time working on TRIG-related acquisition activities. RMEF charges about $90 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 12/1/11Notes, Page 3 of 5 / hour plus travel costs (not $35/hour as previously reported) and the group agreed that the work is valuable and represents a reasonable expense. Tony will route the contract through Bill for processing. Ira walked the group through a review of the properties that are available for consideration. He reported on his and RMEF’s work to reconnect with owners of previously reviewed properties. Ira and Tony will work together to draft a prioritized list of the parcels reviewed today and will distribute that to the TRIG in a confidential email for review and feedback. BOTANICAL TEAMLET UPDATE Scott is on his honeymoon, so Kathy shared highlights of the Botanical Teamlet’s work since October.  Scott and Kathy went out in October to complete the lichen review at the Upper Baker Hatchery construction site. All the work was done according to USFS standards and the lichen are fine.  They went on another site visit to check on the round-leaved rein orchid site at Wetland 18 and conducted a pre-planting visit of the re-vegetation site at Forest Road 1106 where they removed the old bridge.  The Carex flava 2011 census report was sent out; comments were due in early November. Scott has compiled the comments and sent them to the Carex Working Group for inclusion in the final report. The good news is that they found 75 additional plants since the 2009 baseline. (WhoHoo!). The census is scheduled to take place every other year through license year 10, when the TRIG will re- evaluate the schedule.  The Carex flava management plan went out in October; comments are due now. Kathy pointed out that this plan outlines the census methodology (true count, not representative sampling) and she expressed confidence in the census process and accuracy. Laura Martin stepped in to provide review and comments in the wake of Ann Risvold’s retirement. Kathy asked if there were any additional comments. Tony pointed out that Scott will be out until Dec. 14, so folks have more time. If you haven’t yet commented but want to, please chime in by the 14th. 514 EFFECTIVENESS MONITORING UPDATE A teamlet met in November, reviewed the document outline developed last February, updated it and added additional detail to that outline. PSE folks will use the draft list of monitoring activities to start filling in this outline. Expect to see an early draft in the spring. The formal draft will go out for TRIG review in October 2012 and the final is due to FERC October 2013. The group thanked Tony, Haley, Scott, and Brock for keeping this work moving forward. PLAN UPDATE SCHEDULE Tony reminded the TRIG that the TRMP must be reviewed annually for the first ten years of the license then every five years for the remainder of the license. Any changes will require submitting an amendment to FERC. He asked if the TRIG wants to change or update anything within the TRMP or its related plans. None were identified at the meeting. Tony previously sent an email to all TRIGgers so everyone could have the opportunity weigh in, but did not receive any replies. At this time there is not an identified need to update the TRMP documents, and we will conduct another review at the end of next year. In addition to the FERC-approved plans, the TRIG also has a number of “living documents” (for example the property Program Documents, Plants of Special Status plan, the upcoming Legacy Wood Implementation Plan, etc). Tony noted that the TRIG has a lot of new information for the Alder Creek Program Document; he suggests formally updating this plan when the DNR LTA is complete. He and the PSE team will generate a list of the other plans and note considerations that impact timing of future reviews / updates (for instance, suggesting annual update of the Plants of Special Status plan when the updated state / federal plant lists are announced). Meeting Evaluation  Moved efficiently through the agenda – done early!  Today’s room (small back room in Burlington) OK for small groups; window is nice BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 12/1/11Notes, Page 4 of 5  Light attendance today  While Tony did an admirable job filling Marty’s shoes (thanks for the food!), the salmon was missed  Good job Tony, Marty, Brock, et al, on the DNR application … kudos for quality work!  Thank you Tony, Brock, Haley, and Scott for keeping the 514 work moving forward Draft February 2 Agenda – Location TBD  Agenda, Notes, A.I.  BRCC / License, Budget Updates  Land Acquisition Updates  Post-Acquisition Updates o Alder Creek: DNR Application, 2012 management actions o Burpee Hill: “year one” activities, management program document drafting  Access Management  Botanical Update BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 12/1/11Notes, Page 5 of 5  