Final Meeting Notes January 6, 2011 / 9 a.m. – 12 p.m. / Web-X, Call        Baker River Project License Implementation   Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Meeting Notes Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Ira McDaniel, Scott Heller, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Chris Madsen (NWIFC); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Bob Nelson and Bill Richardson (RMEF); Ann Risvold (USFS); Stan Walsh (SRSC), Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA), meeting via WebEx and conference call. DECISION: Does the TRIG authorize PSE to proceed to negotiate and make an offer to acquire Property G for an amount not to exceed $260,000 – contingent upon the resolution of titled access at no additional cost – with the funding for this acquisition to come from the SA 503 Elk Habitat Acquisition Fund? The decision was approved by consensus (see Property G below). TRIG MEETINGS: February to be an email update only; March 3, 3010 at a central location TBD ACTION ITEMS  Ira Negotiate to acquire Property G, per the decision approved at today’s meeting  Tony Coordinate another Alder Creek Field day and work w/ Joetta re: mapping sensitive areas  Tony & Marty Continue working on the first phase of the DNR application and develop a draft action plan (phase two of the DNR application) for the TRIG to review and edit  Ira, Ray, & Tony Research the property that Chris M. brought forward  Tony & Brock Determine whether the property Chris M. brought forward is within the core area  Scott Send Ann the list of Scotch Broom and Canada Thistle sites when that is compiled  Tony Send Ann the Alder Creek Program Doc  Haley Email the Eagle Night Roost survey update and map  All Comments on the Osprey and Loon monitoring reports are due by the end of January  All If you would like annual reports for other resource groups (CRAG, ARG, RRG), ask Cary  Tony Email an activities update to TRIG in lieu of a February meeting  Ann Check to see whether the new Everett building is available for our March 3 meeting  Tony Coordinate a central location for the March TRIG meeting PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS:  Tony Work w/ Andy & Haley to create a template for the 514 recommendations due in March  Haley Evaluate 506, 507, and 513 to see if additional (514) monitoring might be appropriate; bring a recommendation to TRIG in March  Bob K. & Haley Consider possible 514 activities related to 502; recommendation due to TRIG in March  Tony Compile existing studies, data related to elk forage, consider possible 514 activities related to 503; recommendation due to TRIG in March  Scott & Brock Consider possible 514 activities related to 504; recommendation due to TRIG in March  Bob N Send Tony contact information for RMEF elk forage expert who could help identify appropriate site-specific methodologies for the activities described in the Program Doc BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT   FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027    Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 1/6/11 Notes, Page 1 of 4    All Per BRCC, please ensure your organization's representative list is current and accurate  Kim & Gretta Put left-over Late Seral Forest money into TERF; update TRIG  BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE PSE provides monthly email updates on Resource / Working Group activities to members of the BRCC. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. They are anticipating in-person meetings semi-annually; the next in-person meeting is anticipated for next Spring. TRIG Budget Update: The quarterly budget reporting cycle will be January, April, July, and October. Tony invited Will to join in on the call; Will reported that, assuming all of the acquisitions approved to date come through, there will be approximately $150k in the elk acquisition fund, plus the reimbursements that are due from other funds for acquisitions that meet the interests of multiple articles. Tony estimates that about $60k was spent from the elk O&M fund in 2010. LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE New Property to Consider: Tony and Chris M. brought forward a new property for the TRIG to consider. The property seems to be within at least the periphery of the core area defined by WDFW. The owner is not interested in selling the property at this time, but he contacted Chris expressing interest in working with us to manage the property for elk forage. TRIG asked Ira to work with Ray to do a little more research on the site, including the surrounding land ownership and the easement options available to us. Property G: Tony reported that he and Brock conducted a site visit on Tuesday and the TRIG briefly talked about the parcel. The proposed decision was read aloud. TRIG agreed by consensus of all present to authorize PSE to proceed to negotiate and make an offer to acquire Property G for an amount not to exceed $260,000 – contingent upon the resolution of titled access at no additional cost – with the funding for this acquisition to come from the SA 503 Elk Habitat Acquisition Fund. Ira will proceed and keep the TRIG updated on his progress. While Stan (SRSC) was unable to participate in the full meeting, he called in to confirm his organizations’ support for this action. Property X: Ira reported that the property is under contract and is in a 90-day feasibility study period. The seller is working on the access issues Ira brought to the TRIG’s attention at previous meetings; if there are any issues with this, Ira will report back to the TRIG. He expects the property to close in early to mid April. Tony thanked everyone for their site visits and other work related to finding and acquiring the property. Ira and Bill (RMEF) asked the group to continue to maintain confidentiality about this acquisition during these final days before the property actually closes. BOTANICAL TEAMLET UPDATE Scott reported that he is getting work organized for this year’s treatment of Canada Thistle and Scotch Broom. Ann asked Scott to send her the list of Scotch Broom and Canada Thistle sites when he has those compiled. Scott is also organizing work for the retreatment of the Reed Canary Grass sites this spring. The 509 Habitat Management Plan is on track to come to the TRIG later this month for review. Scott noted that the Carex flava census is to be done every other year, and is due this year. He will contact the Carex Working Group to schedule the census for this August. Scott also reported that he and Kathy went out Dec. 16 to conduct follow-up monitoring of lichen sites at Chadwick Creek and near the UB hatchery; they confirmed that the lichen at the hatchery was not harmed by the construction. REPORT UPDATES Haley noted that the Osprey and Loon monitoring reports were sent out in December. Please send comments back by the end of January. Tony noted that PSE is also working on the final annual reports for the 500 series. He thinks they will be sent out via a CD due to the file sizes involved. Members of each resource BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT   FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027    Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 1/6/11Notes, Page 2 of 4   group will get the annual reports that relate to their areas. If you would like to review the annual reports that relate to other resource group areas (ARG, RRG or CRAG), ask Cary for a copy of the other CDs. EAGLE NIGHT ROOST SURVEY UPDATE Haley reported that there have been five surveys to date. She presented a table and map showing the number of eagles seen at each survey; she will email this to the TRIG.  November 8 – no eagles  November 30 – three eagles, all near the north end of the lake  December 6 – no eagles  December 22 – three near the south end of the lake, one at thunder creek, and one by the boat launch  January 5 – five sightings: one near thunder creek, three observations at the south end of the lake near the dam and one at the north end of the lake Based on the observations so far, surveyors have not observed evidence of night roost activity in the area. There will be three more surveys; the next one is scheduled for January 20. POST-ACQUISITION ACTIVITIES Tony reported that he and Marty met to begin work on the DNR application process. Marty reminded folks that the intention is to apply for a long-term plan, which can be good for a period of up to 15 years. The TRIG’s request for approval of an alternate plan (seeking a variance from the regular forest practices rules) will be embedded in the long-term plan. Marty reported that the DNR is well organized around this process and the guidelines are clear. It looks like it will take up to six months to conduct the surveys and gather the information needed to submit the application. There are two phases in the application process. The first phase is to submit information about the property as it exists so the DNR can confirm eligibility. Marty and Tony are working on gathering the background information for this. To get ready for the second phase, Marty suggested that Tony develop a first draft of an action plan for the TRIG to review and edit. Tony then sought feedback on a high-level list of the basic actions that the TRIG would likely want to do in the next 15 years, including: pasture management, brush and blackberry clearing, clearing the “Christmas Tree” areas, creating clearings for permanent elk forage, legacy wood work, and road management. Brock reminded the group that a good bit of wetland O&M money will come on board within the next 15 years and suggested TRIG consider whether it should list wetland activities in the long-term plan. Marty noted that the DNR is most interested in activities that impact trees and roads. He also noted that the plan doesn’t necessarily have to be a full 15 years. Long-term plans can be submitted for anywhere between 3 and 15 years, and it is possible to amend a long-term plan if the TRIG later wants to add other activities. It was also noted that other acquisitions have greater potential for wetland enhancement activities and would probably be the focus of the bulk of wetland O&M money, but the group asked Marty and Tony to include wetland activities in the list of possible activities in the draft action plan that will be presented to the TRIG for review and editing. Tony noted that he, Kathy, Haley and Scott went on-site to start the stream mapping and were able to complete mapping of the west parcel. Another site visit will be needed to finish the work on the east parcel. The DNR requires a certified geo-technical expert to assess roads and conduct the steep slope analysis. Since nobody on the TRIG has this certification, Tony presented a proposal from Bruce Stoker of Earth Systems to conduct this work and develop a plan for a new road segment into the west side of the property south of the wetland. The estimate for all of this work is about $11k. Tony shared background about extending the road; this opportunity came about because DNR will be building a road through their land almost up to the Alder Creek property line for a timber harvest this summer. Extending the DNR road onto the Alder Creek property would give TRIG access to polygon 5.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT   FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027    Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 1/6/11Notes, Page 3 of 4   Brock asked how much has been spent on surveys. Tony estimated that a little over $10k has been spent so far, with another $3k-5k in field work remaining and about $11k for Earth Systems to conduct the steep slope and road analysis. There will also be about $10k-$12k in the cultural review. Ann asked whether TRIG would need to develop a separate noxious weed plan for the Alder Creek property. Tony noted that the Alder Creek Program Doc has documented the presence of Carex comosa; TRIG could decide to add a sub-plan to deal with the species specifically if that is needed. Ann asked Tony to re-send the Program Doc to her. Meeting Evaluation:  More frequent check-ins for questions from folks on the phone  When a decision is listed on an agenda with a time, be sure to honor the published time  Who-Hoo! The TRIG is moving forward on some great acquisitions!  Meeting efficient; done early Draft March 3 Agenda –  Property G & X update  Post-Acquisition Update, Alder Creek DNR Application  Botanical update  Eagle surveys report  514 Reports  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT   FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027    Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 1/6/11Notes, Page 4 of 4     23 55 8 12 6 111 2 192 1 PDT NA  01-06-11_TRIG_FINAL_notes.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 9.1 for Word 