BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group January 9, 2001 1:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273  MEETING NOTES  Mission: "To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process." Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com PRESENT: Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Gail Thompson (Historical Research Associates), Rob Whitlam, by phone, (Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation), Ernie De Coteau (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe), Shari Brewer (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe), John Boggs, Gail Boggs, (Town of Concrete Heritage Museum Association), Alex Maass (Historical Research Associates), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) The meeting started at 1:10 p.m. and ended at 4:00 p.m. **NOTE: THE NEXT MEETING IS TENTATIVELY SET FOR THE FIRST WEDNESDAY IN FEBRUARY AT THE LONGHOUSE IN DARRINGTON. DIRECTIONS WILL BE SENT WITH THE AGENDA FOR THE MEETING.** FUTURE MEETING DATES/LOCATIONS Future meeting dates are on the 1st Wednesday of each month: February 12, 2001 at the Longhouse, Darrington March 13, from 1:00 to 4:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/9/2001 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> All: Send Gail (HRA) comments on the Unanticipated Discovery Plan by Wednesday, January 31, so they can be addressed by the next meeting on February 12. <b7> HRA: Contact Leland Stilson/DNR re: DNR land. <b7> HRA: Send copies of Jason Schmidt video (December 2000) to interested members. <b7> Connie: Check with Kathy Anderson re: Forest Service participation. <b7> Connie: Check with Bob Barnes re: his availability to present Hydro 101 course at March 13 meeting. <b7> Shari: Check with Forest Service re: horse trail and bridge. <b7> Jessie: Research Bear Creek Hydro past archeological work. <b7> HRA: Check into getting larger (more legible) map of p. 80 (Chapter 6) of the Fish History document. <b7> HRA: Get copies of GLO notes that go along with the maps. <b7> Jessie: Bring relevant information from the Forest Service Watershed Analysis and info from Chris Lawson re: Recreation Working Group. <b7> Jessie: Status/copies of GIS maps. <b7> Jessie: Check to see if lake elevation data is available to team. <b7> Jessie: Check into possibility of a boat trip on Lake Shannon.  AGENDA --January 9, 2001 PSE Office in Mt. Vernon, WA 1:00 to 4:00 1. Review minutes/agenda 2. Action Items <b7> Forest Service participation <b7> Research Design <b7> APE <b7> Unanticipated Discovery Plan 3. Expectations 4. Parking Lot 5. Set agenda for February 12, 2001 meeting Field trip on Feb. 8? Future meeting times/locations  FOREST SERVICE PARTICIPATION Concern was expressed re: lack of Forest Service participation apparently due to a recent lack of funding. PSE will check with team leaders of other working groups to see if they have been similarly impacted. Connie will follow up with Kathy Anderson of the Forest Service and let team members know what to expect.  RESEARCH DESIGN COMMENTS HRA distributed an updated version of the Research Design. This new version addresses comments received from Bob Mierendorf, Upper Skagit, Sauk-Suiattle, John and Gail Boggs, and Rob Whitlam. There were no comments from Jan Hollenback of the Forest Service. Jan said rather than review the document ahead of time that she would make her comments in the form of adding conditions to the permit. The actual comments of interested parties will be included in an Appendix of the Research Design.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/9/2001 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   <b7> Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines: (National Park Service and Upper Skagit) HRA acknowledges that the standards will be taken into consideration where applicable. <b7> Geology and Paleo Environment: added information on the importance and will continue research as needed for interpretation of survey results. <b7> Site Definition: changed to 5 objects within 30 meters of each other; can be 1 feature or 1 structure in association with any or no artifacts. <b7> Research Design: moved research questions to earlier in the document, increased specificity of questions, and added more questions. <b7> Selection of Survey Areas: will survey all but steeper slope areas (many of which are bedrock). Will ground truth them in the field to check for rock art, rockshelters, and potential burials; will survey at least 10% of these areas; past experience has resulted in higher survey because of surveying across these areas when walking between other survey areas. Those areas cover a good deal of the Lake Shannon reservoir. We can't be sure how many acres and what percent will be surveyed, but the low potential area will be evaluated in the field. <b7> Inventory Data Categories: Have changed definition of site; will put in one or more shovel test/probes where isolates and sites are found to check for subsurface deposits and stratigraphy; will record information on isolates similar to sites--landform, soil, vegetation. <b7> Inventory Field Methods: will do shovel probes/tests to check strata of reservoir geomorphic setting and site stratigraphy. <b7> Evaluation of Field Methods and Curation: will take constant volume samples as needed in test excavations <b7> Additional Upper Skagit Comments: will aim for low water level and put into CRMP to pick up lower areas as needed in later years; need to know tribal ceremony needs; tribes will review and comment on draft reports before finalizing; sensitive information won't go to the public. <b7> Additional Rob Whitlam Comments: we addressed the survey coverage concern; will try to do evaluations at appropriate water levels; Forest Service is lead for NAGPRA on FS land; SHPO/PSE is lead for private land. <b7> Earlier USFS Comment: added information on shovel tests to be used in vegetation areas, also closer interval survey in high potential areas.  AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECT (APE) <b7> The APE has to do with the area that the project impacts or may potentially impact. There has been difficulty determining what lands above the shoreline are impacted by the Project (includes plant facilities). Generally, where you find the most artifacts are where there has already been an impact. It's difficult to determine the broader area where there may be project impacts. <b7> The APE needs to include areas where there may be future development, including campgrounds. We still need to determine whether to include power lines in the APE. The horse trail around the end of Baker Lake is adversely impacting the mountain goats. This bridge is only a couple of years old and the impacts are still unknown. Camping areas all along the lakes will definitely be included in the APE. <b7> Where the original lake and campground exist is a natural corridor to the Hot Springs. There is also a campground on the other side of the lake where there is also a corridor up to Watson Peak. We need to consider how use of these may be impacted by the project. The old Bear Creek powerhouse will likely be included in the APE.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/9/2001 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   <b7> A question was raised re: "How far up from mouths of creeks we should include in the APE?" We may want to draw the line at waterfalls in the creeks since fish wouldn't go beyond there. <b7> We need to keep mitigation lands in mind, and tribal access for traditional cultural activities. In mitigation, it may be appropriate to protect sites. We will address this if they fall within or adjacent to the APE even if they are on non-project land. <b7> We also need to keep in touch with developments in the Terrestrial and Recreational Working Groups. <b7> HRA will present a draft upper limit boundary of the APE for review at the March meeting.  UNANTICIPATED DISCOVERY PLAN HRA distributed a draft of the Plan for Dealing with the Unanticipated Discovery of Cultural Resources (including Human Remains) during the Relicensing Studies for PSE Baker River Project as an initial draft for review. Gail explained the intention of the document. During the course of the new licensing process, it is possible that someone might run into an archeological site or human remains. The purpose of the document is to establish some rules on how to proceed if this should happen. Gail needs to clarify which party (e.g., PSE, FS, or DNR) would be responsible to make sure that these procedures are followed. Protection of sites and confidential treatment of sites still need to be addressed. Also, a process needs to be outlined for dealing with non-native burials.  HRA asked that other comments be sent to Gail by Wednesday, January 31, so they can be addressed by the next meeting on February 7.  MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones: <b7> Ernie's participation <b7> Good discussion <b7> Lots of constructive ideas <b7> Rob's participation by phone <b7> Finished on time! <b7> Got a lot done! <b7> HRA's excellent preparation/documentation.  Opportunities for Improvement: <b7> Potentially losing the Forest Service's participation in the process  AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING--February 12, 2001 Longhouse, Darrington 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items <b7> Forest Service participation <b7> Research Design <b7> Unanticipated Discovery Plan <b7> APE 4. Sauk-Suiattle Tribal presentation by Lawrence BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/9/2001 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   5. Expectations 6. Set agenda, location for next meeting PARKING LOT <b7> Map of general project area, include transmission lines <b7> Upland area--importance of mountain goat <b7> Keys to access Shannon and Baker Lakes and gates up lake <b7> Develop "Area of Potential Effects" Map <b7> Coordinate with Terrestrial and Recreation Working Groups <b7> Bob Barnes will give a course on Hydrology 101 (March 13 meeting, from 3:00 to 4:00) <b7> Glossary of terms: what are "protection," "mitigation," and "enhancement"? <b7> Develop TCP (Traditional Cultural Properties) studies <b7> Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources <b7> Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests <b7> Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations <b7> Cultural for DNR Land <b7> Cultural aspects of Forest and Fish Agreement <b7> Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? <b7> Have tribal presentations on cultural/spiritual significance of resources  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/9/2001 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5    2001cultural20010109.pdf en 