BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group May 8, 2001 12:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273  AGENDA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items • Review Confidentiality Document • Archaeological Update • Update on drawdown issue/map • Discussion of APE • Finalize Unanticipated Discovery Plan 4. Set agenda and location for June 12, July 10 5. Evaluate Meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Working Group May 8, 2001 12:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273  FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process.”  Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com PRESENT: Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Gail Thompson (Historical Research Associates), Lee Stilson (Department of Natural Resources), Bob Mierendorf (North Cascades National Park), Shari Brewer (SaukSuiattle Tribe), John Boggs (Concrete Heritage Museum Association), Kristen Schuldt (Puget Sound Energy), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) The meeting started at 12:10 noon and ended at 4:10 p.m. FUTURE MEETING DATES/LOCATIONS June 12, 12:00-4:00 p.m. in Mt. Vernon INTRODUCTIONS The team welcomed first-time attendees: Kristen Schuldt – PSE’s new Baker Relicensing Information Coordinator NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Send comments to Gail re: UDP by May 25th. • ALL: Consider costs/justification for 2002 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/8/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   • • •  • • • • • • •  Gary: Confirm nature of West Pass Dike and area near Horseshoe Cove Swimming Area. Scott, Larry, Jason: Run confidentiality draft document by Tribal Councils for feedback. Jessie: Send Confidentiality Document draft to Stan, Norma, Scott, Larry Wasserman, Larry Campbell, Shari, Jason, Ernie with a note to pass it on. Include explanation of what it is and why we’re passing on (to include in Communication Protocol/Process Document). Solicitors need to read and review as soon as possible. Gail: Get maps and colored photos of where artifacts were found to Tribes. Bob: Calculate curation costs at Park Facility Jessie: Touch base with Tribes re: 2002 costs Jessie: Check with Tony re: a map of the drawdown zone (R-2 is close to finishing). Gail: Get copies of APE maps from Larry/Scott so can update them for review. Jessie: Get update from Tony/Connie re: protection plans for Memorial Day weekend - arrange meeting with Tribes? Include Norma, Larry, Scott and Recreation folks. Connie: Distribute drafts of Communications Protocol and Process Document to all for review.  AGENDA – May 8, 2001 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items • Review Confidentiality Document • Archeological update • Update on drawdown issue/map • Discussion of APE • Finalize Unanticipated Discovery Plan 4. Set agenda and location for June 12, July 10th 5. Evaluate meeting REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Bob’s participation in this group is as Heritage Program specialist for the Forest Service. • Jessie thanked Lee for his feedback on the confidentiality issues section of the April meeting notes. She requested that if people feel they do not have time to go over draft notes thoroughly, please look at those areas that are of particular concern to you. Bob asked that the term “agreement” be changed to a “list of confidentiality issues to consider”. Jessie will make this change and send out an amended version of the final notes. • Shari reported that the construction debris at Thunder Creek was right at the valley floor – at the creek mouth on the base of the hill. The debris includes a ladder nailed to a tree and there is a cable screwed into the rock. The debris at Bear Creek is considered the powerhouse and dam themselves. These issues were added to the Parking Lot, as they have considerable tribal significance and are on Lone Star property. • Jessie checked with the Recreation Working Group. They are in the process of creating a GIS map of dispersed campgrounds. They will share this information with this group as soon as it becomes available.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/8/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   CONFIDENTIALITY DOCUMENT Bob incorporated comments and suggestions from our April meeting information into the new draft. He cautioned the group in trying to go too far with trying to apply this document without tribal participation. Jessie suggested that we pursue this further during the official consultation that PSE will have with the tribal governments. The formal consultation for Traditional Cultural Properties has not yet begun. PSE has just recently filed with FERC their Notice of Intent to re-license. The next step will be to ask FERC for permission to use the alternative licensing process. It may be more appropriate to continue work on the confidentiality protocol after consultation has formally begun. The confidentiality protocol should also be addressed in the Process Document and Communications Protocol being drafted for the relicensing process. In the meantime the confidentiality document draft will serve as a check list for our use. NOTE: Intellectual as well as cultural property needs to be addressed. This includes knowledge/information passed down through families. Funding and tribal participation is and will be an ongoing issue. ARCHEOLOGICAL UPDATE Gail reported that Gary’s team has completed 85% of the drawdown zone of Baker Lake (above 692 feet elevation) during the 10 day survey. They recorded some historic and prehistoric sites and isolates. All sites were eroded and had been vandalized. Most of the sites were judged to be early to mid 20th century. Gary suggests that the remaining field work be after Labor Day (post tourist season). Bob suggested that February/March would be better for additional survey work, as there would be good forest and ground visibility. UPDATE ON ACTION TAKEN ON DRAWDOWN ISSUE/MAP Jessie and Tony Fuchs (PSE team leader for the Terrestrial Working Group) attended a meeting with other utilities on May 1 re: the effects the recreational season will have on natural and cultural resources. Tony and Jessie agree that PSE needs to come up with a comprehensive strategy to address these issues. They already talked with the Forest Service briefly and will be involving the Tribes in forming a strategy. This strategy will likely include signage. PSE needs to take the lead in engaging Forest Service and Tribal participation. They also need to do what they can to encourage people to utilize certain areas and avoid others. UNANTICIPATED DISCOVERY PLAN Gail incorporated Larry and Bob’s comments into the plan. These comments included specifying that PSE fund re-burial if it is needed; that specific PSE representatives be named; that notification be timely (within 24 hours); that final disposition of human remains be consistent with NAGPRA regulations, etc. She distributed copies of the updated draft for everyone to review. With tribal approval, we hope to finalize this document at our June meeting.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/8/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   DISCUSSION OF AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECTS (APE) • Gail brought an updated set of maps for the team to review. • Shari brought up that the GLO notes mention several small lakes and marshes. She will review the proposed APE to compare it to these locations. She will also share a generic list of culturally significant plants and Culturally Modified Trees (CMT) with the Terrestrial Working Group. • We will develop a list of areas outside the APE that should be surveyed for CMTs. INTERTRIBAL CULTURAL RESOURCES ADVISORY GROUP Shari distributed a draft of the Vision Statement for ICRAG. This draft is a work in progress and pertains to all tribes in WA State. LIST OF MEETING HANDOUTS • Intertribal Cultural Resources Advisory Group Vision Statement • Unanticipated Discovery Plan (UDP) Draft 5/4/01 PARKING LOT • “How do we address upland areas?” • Map of general project area, include transmission lines • Upland area—importance of mountain goat • Keys to access Shannon and Baker Lakes and gates up lake • Develop “Area of Potential Effects” Map • Coordinate with Terrestrial and Recreation Working Groups • Glossary of terms: what are “protection,” “mitigation,” and “enhancement”? • Develop TCP (Traditional Cultural Properties) studies • Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources • Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests • Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations • Cultural for DNR Land • Cultural aspects of Forest and Fish Agreement • Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? • Have tribal presentations on cultural/spiritual significance of resources • Possibility of transplanting young cedar trees • Availability of downed cedar for tribal use MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones: • Kept on track • Finished early • Introduced other important issues • Good listening • High passion/commitment BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/8/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   • Good food and drink • Kristen’s participation Opportunities for Improvement: • Need better attendance • Indoors – plan an outdoor meeting AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING— June 12, 2001, from noon to 4:00 p.m. at PSE Office, Mount Vernon, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items • Disposition • Curation Costs • Other • Finalize Unanticipated Discovery Plan • Discuss relationship of Confidentiality Document to Communications Protocol and Process Document • Discuss scheduling of additional survey work • Review site locations • Discussion of APE 4. Set agenda and location for July 10, August 14th 5. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/8/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5    2001cultural20010508.pdf en 