BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group March 13, 2001 12:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 AGENDA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items <b7> Forest Service participation <b7> Research Design <b7> APE <b7> Unanticipated Discovery Plan 4. Review study requests for 2001 5. Bob Barnes' Hydrology Presentation 6. Expectations 7. Set agenda and location for next meeting 8. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Working Group March 13, 2001 PSE Offices Mt. Vernon, WA  FINAL MEETING NOTES  Mission: "To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process."  Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com  PRESENT: Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Gail Thompson (Historical Research Associates), Ernie De Coteau (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe), Lee Stilson (Department of Natural Resources), John Boggs, (Town of Concrete Heritage Museum Association), Alex Maass (Historical Research Associates), Gary Wessen (Wessen & Associates), Bob Mierendorf (North Cascades National Park), Larry Campbell (Swinomish Indian Tribal Council), Rob Whitlam (Office of Archaeology & Historic Preservation), Bob Barnes (PSE), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting)  The meeting started at 12:10 noon and ended at 4:30 p.m.  FUTURE MEETING DATES/LOCATIONS Future meeting dates are usually on the 2nd Tuesday of each month. We are considering moving our meetings to Mondays due to schedule conflicts of some of the team members, but will stay with Tuesday for now. The next meeting will be on Tuesday, April 10, from 12:00 noon to 4:00 p.m. at the Swinomish Tribal Community, LaConner. PSE will provide lunch.  INTRODUCTIONS The team welcomed first-time attendees: Bob Mierendorf of The North Cascades National Park Service (sitting in indefinitely for Jan Hollenbeck of the US Forest Service) and Lee Stilson (Department of  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 3/13/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   Natural Resources). Everyone expressed appreciation for their attendance. The tribes especially noted their respect for Bob's expertise. NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Get comments on the Unanticipated Discovery Plan to Gail by March 27th. <b7> Connie: Check with Shari re: location of construction debris on Bear and Thunder Creeks. Bear Creek is not on PSE property. Perhaps this could be identified and mapped as part of the archaeological survey work. <b7> Jessie: Bring GIS maps (if available) <b7> Bob and Gail: Bring sample/template of confidentiality agreement for us to use as reference. Make a list of confidentiality issues for the team to review at our next meeting. <b7> Bob: See what the Forest Service is doing re: addressing public and drawdown issues. <b7> Connie: Get together with Jessie, John, Gary, Forest Service, and the Tribes to execute a plan to address public and drawdown issues. <b7> Gail send copy of Tacoma press release to Connie. <b7> Connie and Jessie address possible signage for reservoirs access areas. <b7> Larry: Email Jessie a copy of the Virginia Mason article so she can distribute to team members. <b7> Ernie, Larry and Scott: Check to see if they have received ARPA permit application to review (from Jan Hollenbeck/Forest Service) <b7> Bob will check with Kathy Anderson on ARPA permit status. <b7> Gail: Send latest version of Research Design to Jessie to distribute. <b7> Jessie: Get map/numbers of dispersed campgrounds from the Recreation Working Group. AGENDA <ad>March 13, 2001 PSE Office, Mt. Vernon, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items <b7> Research Design <b7> APE <b7> Unanticipated Discovery Plan 4. Review study requests for 2001/Field Season--other studies appropriate 5. Hydrology 101 (Bob Barnes) 6. Expectations 7. Set next agenda 8. Evaluate meeting REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Jessie: Everything at the Baker Project is on hold due to the outage that is currently underway. Jessie was unable therefore to work out details concerning cedar with the Project Manager. We will move the requests for downed cedar and transplant availability of young cedar trees to our Working Group Parking Lot List. Jessie will keep in touch with the Team Leader of the Terrestrial Working Group.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 3/13/2001 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   <b7> Jessie: The snag video was an internal work product (a couple minutes long, dealing with snag removal where they created boating hazards). Gary Wessen visited the work area on Lake Shannon, found no evidence of cultural/historical materials, and approved the snag-clearing project. <b7> Bear Creek Project (Project No. 3286, August 1982): Jessie distributed information from Bear Creek past archaeological work. This may be outside our APE, but she brought information anyway because the team requested that she do so. Ernie expressed concern that there had been no historical sites designated. He said the oral history is there and the sites need to be documented. Jessie explained that in the Bear Creek survey, it was stated that historic buildings probably did not have sufficient integrity to be accepted to the National Register. No archaeological sites were found. We need to recognize that there could be historical/archaeological sites anywhere. If we determine that Bear Creek is within our APE, we will determine appropriate follow-up action. <b7> HRA will bring at least one copy of the GLO notes to accompany the maps they distributed a couple of months ago. They will also bring additional copies of the maps to the next meeting. <b7> Jessie: Checked into status/copies of GIS maps. PSE is having R-2 consultants do a basic land ownership map and FERC boundary. They have also done some fly-overs for topographical information (at 5 ft. contour intervals). They are in the process of translating these into GIS format. These maps should be available for our next meeting. <b7> Confidentiality: We need to develop a plan re: Who is notified when sites are discovered. The tribes wish to have people know on a "need-to-know" basis. Do we develop "what if" scenarios? Do we leave it to PSE/Tribal discretion? In the past, these things have been dealt with through a written confidentiality agreement. This needs to be done fairly soon. Bob and Gail will bring a list of relevant issues for us to discuss at our April 10 meeting.  NEW ISSUE <b7> John mentioned that people were taking advantage of the low reservoir levels, and concern was raised for activity in the drawdown areas. One Sunday afternoon, he witnessed 70-80 people walking the lakebed. The question was raised as to whether PSE should hire someone to police the lakebeds, as Tacoma Power is doing at the Cowlitz Project. They are using a utility employee who is not a law enforcement officer and cannot write citations. We could possibly enlist Tribal police to help. Tacoma is coordinating its efforts with State Fish and Wildlife enforcement people. Several fines have been levied for collecting and also for operating vehicles within the drawdown zone. They are also putting up signage and closing some roads. <b7> The Federal Law Enforcement Training Center holds an excellent 40-hour course for law enforcement officers or anyone else who might be put in the position of protecting cultural resources. We could check their schedule and see what we could do in terms of attending the course. It seems obvious that the landowner should take steps to protect resources on their land. PSE will coordinate efforts with the Forest Service and Tribes to address this issue. Our challenge is to create a coordinated effort with affected parties sharing costs and responsibilities. Initial Steps to Address Protection Issues: 1. Gather information re: where, when 2. Run local paper articles: East Co. News (by 3/20) Courier (weekly)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 3/13/2001 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   Skagit Valley Herald (daily) 3. Put up signs 4. Make use of tribal law officers (use them in supporting role) 5. PSE talks with Sheriff's office and State Patrol to alert them of the problem. Take care to cite relevant State/Federal/laws. RESEARCH DESIGN Gail reported that the Research Design is in the process of continual review. The latest draft went to the Forest Service along with the ARPA permit application on Feb 2. We will wait until we hear back from the Tribes and the Forest Service before we discuss further changes. Jan Hollenbeck sent out the application to the Tribes on February 22nd for a 30-day review. We'll get an update at our next meeting. AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECTS (APE) <b7> The APE for traditional cultural properties often exceeds the APE for archaeology and history. The relationship between the Forest Service/PSE pertaining to the APE area as we define it will need to be determined and monitored. Regarding the debris clearing issue, we don't want to overlook an area that is a potential site. Ernie stated that we want to identify any important places and have them evaluated for inclusion on the National Register. <b7> Concern was expressed that any effects from the project need to be addressed by PSE regardless of ownership of place they fall. Indirect effects (e.g., as caused by changing reservoir elevations) as well as direct effects need to be considered. These may need to be addressed in a Cultural Resources Management Plan or in an MOU from affected parties. <b7> Alex distributed maps of the proposed preliminary APE (hand drawn) for the group to review. In: Power facilities, existing campgrounds, drawdown areas. Under consideration: Transmission lines (need to consider power pole placements and ratio of access road to length of transmission line). <b7> Again, we don't want to overlook historic plantations/vegetation. We need to survey and document what's there to see if we can take action to preserve it. UNANTICIPATED DISCOVERY PLAN Gail distributed the newest version of the UDP. Please give her comments by March 27th so she can incorporate them into the next version. We hope to finalize at our next meeting. STUDY REQUESTS FOR 2001 FIELD SEASON Potential 2001 Studies: <b7> Gail mentioned the need to do (preferably during the 2001 field season) a geomorphology study to see how the geomorphology of the reservoir has affected usage, etc. Where is erosion and deposition taking place? We will need an action plan to deal with different types of erosion over the long term. We will also need to distinguish landform types, e.g., distinguish alluvial fan from river terrace. We want to identify and protect what we can culturally over the long term. HRA will consider completing a study request form for the group to review.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 3/13/2001 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   Note: Ernie reiterated the interest of the tribes in identifying all cultural/historical areas and getting them put on the National Register. He also expressed concern over the declining numbers of the mountain goat. Efforts to address this issue must be coordinated with Norma Joseph of the Sauk-Suiattle Tribe and the Terrestrial Working Group. HYDRO 101 PRESENTATION BY BOB BARNES Bob Barnes gave a "Hydrology 101" presentation covering the natural hydrology of the watershed, the physical characteristics of the reservoirs, how and why they are operated the way they are, a brief review of market factors affecting project operation, and a review of historical and current reservoir operations. PARKING LOT <b7> Map of general project area, include transmission lines <b7> Upland area--importance of mountain goat <b7> Keys to access Shannon and Baker Lakes and gates up lake <b7> Develop "Area of Potential Effects" Map <b7> Coordinate with Terrestrial and Recreation Working Groups <b7> Glossary of terms: what are "protection," "mitigation," and "enhancement"? <b7> Develop TCP (Traditional Cultural Properties) studies <b7> Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources <b7> Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests <b7> Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations <b7> Cultural for DNR Land <b7> Cultural aspects of Forest and Fish Agreement <b7> Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? <b7> Have tribal presentations on cultural/spiritual significance of resources <b7> Possibility of transplanting young cedar trees <b7> Availability of downed cedar for tribal use MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones: <b7> Bob M. and Lee's participation <b7> Bob Barnes' presentation <b7> Pizza! <b7> Ernie & Larry continually reminding us of Tribal perspectives <b7> Meeting protocol and facilitation, study request form <b7> Gail's notice of confidentiality concerns <b7> We take responsibility for content of minutes <b7> Larry's article! Opportunities for Improvement:  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 3/13/2001 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5   <b7> Started and ended late <b7> Took too much time on action items AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING-- April 10, 2001, from noon to 4:00 p.m. at Swinomish Tribal Community, LaConner 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items <b7> Questions/Comments on Bear Creek document <b7> Review list of confidentiality issues developed by Bob, et al <b7> Update on actions taken to protect drawdown area 4. Update on Research Design and ARPA Permit 5. Finalize APE (?) 6. Finalize Unanticipated Discovery Plan (?) 7. Review study requests for 2001 8. Expectations 9. Set agenda, location for next meeting 10. Evaluate the meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 3/13/2001 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6    2001cultural20010313.pdf en 