BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group November 13, 2001 10:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 Bring a Sack Lunch <ad> PSE Will Provide Snacks and Drinks AGENDA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items <b7> Training Update 4. Review TCP training 5. Hammer out APE (agree on criteria) 6. End of year list of accomplishments 7. Set agenda and location for December 11 and January 8 meetings 8. Evaluate Meeting   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Working Group November 13, 2001 10:00 p.m. <ad> 4:00 p.m. PSE Mt. Vernon Business Office 1700 College Way Mt. Vernon, WA  MEETING NOTES Mission: "To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process." Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com PRESENT: Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Larry Campbell (Swinomish Tribe), Janis Bouma (USFS- Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie-Olympic National Forests), Gary Wessen (Wessen & Associates), Marty Loesch (Swinomish Tribal Attorney's Office), Alex Maass (HRA), Gail Thompson (HRA), Rob Whitlam - by phone - (Office of Archaeology & Historic Preservation), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) The meeting started at 10:20 and ended at 2:15 p.m. FUTURE MEETING DATES January 8, February 12, March 12, April 9, 2002 NOTE: FUTURE MEETINGS WILL BEGIN AT NOON UNTIL 4:00 p.m. All regular attendees were reminded of the importance of letting Jessie know if unable to attend a meeting. Jessie will also put a meeting cancellation notice on her office voice mail (425-462-3609) in the event of any sudden bad winter weather.  INTRODUCTIONS BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/13/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   The group welcomed Marty Loesch who is an attorney for Swinomish Tribal Council. Marty will be attending our meetings whenever possible.  HANDOUTS <b7> Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group - Progress Report (August 2001) <b7> Cultural and Historical Resources Working Group <ad> APE for Archaeology (November 13, 2001)  NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Give comments on Section V of Research Design (re: site testing and evaluation) to Jessie by December 14. <b7> ALL: Get comments to Jessie on Draft re: APE definition by December 14. <b7> Larry: Run Unanticipated Discovery Plan (draft) by Tribal Councils for feedback. <b7> Jessie: Send out Cultural Resources Training outline and contact tribal members to see if they can participate in the archeological piece of the training. <b7> Gary: Contact Larry Nelson re: ARPA Training. <b7> Charles: Contact local law enforcement folks to attend archaeological training. <b7> Connie: Talk to Team Leaders re: year end list of accomplishments/matrix to track issues/alternative responses that overlap across Working Groups. <b7> Jessie: Send updated list of 2001 accomplishments to members to review. <b7> Gary: Work with R-2 to draw the APE based on our set of rules prior to our next meeting. <b7> Janis: Check Forest Service office availability for January 8, February 12 meetings Mount Lake Terrace/Sedro-Woolley)? <b7> Alex: Ask R-2 to send compressed file of map with APE electronically to members prior to January 8.  November 13, 2001, from 10:00 to 4:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items <b7> Training update 4. Review TCP training 5. Hammer out APE (agree on criteria) 6. 2001 Accomplishments 7. Set agenda for December 11, and January 8 meetings 8. Evaluate meeting  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Reviewed sample (Tacoma Power) Cultural Resource Management Plan (CRMP) measures. <b7> ALL: Reviewed latest draft (10-4) of Unanticipated Discovery Plan. <b7> Jessie: Sent list of APE criteria defined by this group for all to review prior to next meeting. <b7> Jessie: Worked with Gary, Larry to continue fleshing out training outline.  COLLECTION/CURATION FOLLOW UP  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/13/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   Jessie shared an email she received from Karen Marshall of the Skagit County Historical Museum, offering her assistance in understanding curation-related nomenclature. We may consider a visit to her site at an appropriate time in the future. She has graciously offered to give us a tour/talk or whatever meets our needs.  CULTURAL RESOURCE TRAINING Pending acceptance of the UDP, Jessie has talked with Gail and Connie about Gail providing PSE with a sensitivity training in January 2002. She would do this with PSE officers, directors, the whole Baker Relicensing Team and other interested folks to underscore the importance of tribal consultation, UDP, etc. We will try to have tribal participation in Gail's training.  Then Gary could follow up with archaeological training (including UDP) for the same folks, and a more detailed (hands-on) version of this training for the people who work up at the plant. We'll be sure to get their input prior to the training and work to make the training user friendly.  Deputy Nelson could follow Gary's training with ARPA regulations. This training would be for the folks at the plants. Tribal presentations (as done by Larry Campbell) could be folded into the archeological and sensitivity training that Gary provides. He'll discuss this with the tribes. Janis suggested that the training include protocol re: Who to call, what to do, etc.  We need to button up with the Forest Service on these trainings, since Forest Service land is also involved.  TCP TRAINING Jessie debriefed us on the National Preservation Institute Traditional Cultural Properties Training in San Francisco. Jessie, Connie, and Ed Schild for PSE attended along with various tribal representatives including Larry Campbell (Swinomish), Jason Joseph (Sauk Suiattle), and Scott Schuyler (Upper Skagit), as well as Gail Thompson and Alex Maass (HRA). . Our "team" had eight members at the training. Connie got feedback re: how amazing it was that we attended as a team (licensee, consultants, and tribal representatives) and that we were all working together and appeared to like each other. (It's true!) It was also nice to get to know Jason, Scott and Larry better. All appreciated the time to "be" together. Larry reported that he found the training to be very valuable in that many questions were answered and new questions arose as a result.  The TCP trainer (Tom King) emphasized that it is not necessary to take an extremely literal approach, since TCP is a very fuzzy concept. "Sacred" is a very difficult concept to define/grasp. It was also pointed out that putting places on the National Register does not necessarily afford them protection. Tom King also stressed that in defining TCPs, we should focus on the spirit rather than the letter of the law <ad> Focus on a solution.  Larry sees defining TCPs for tribes as putting up a red flag that would send people to talk to the appropriate people before beginning a project. We have the opportunity to supplement the literature Tom distributed at the training. Janis mentioned that Tom has a second edition of his book out.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/13/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   LIST OF 2001 ACCOMPLISHMENTS To Jessie's list that she prepared a couple of meetings ago, we add the following three accomplishments: <b7> Attendance at TCP two-day training by Tom King in San Francisco <b7> Beginning discussion of general components of CRMP <b7> HRA's end of year ARPA report to Forest Service  Audience: FERC progress reports, other Working Groups (including Solution Team), Public Meeting Packages, Website, Tribes, SHPO, other members.  We walked through the list and edited it in light of the audience we defined. Jessie will send out the revised list to members.  2002 ACTIVITIES <b7> Project Tour <b7> RESOLVE training <b7> Set up Technical Working Group re: Traditional Cultural Properties consultation  DISCUSSION OF AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECTS (APE) Jessie distributed copies of the APE Working Definition description that she emailed out the prior week. After some discussion of the need to consider input/possible mitigation measures being suggested by other Working Groups, members were asked to get additional feedback on this to Jessie by December 14.  PREVIEW OF POTENTIAL 2002 STUDIES <b7> Continue with archaeological survey (upland areas, excavation). Resolve APE. <b7> Historic buildings (defer part to 2003?) <b7> TCP ethnobotany study (Skagit System Cooperative) consultation with tribes (proceed with RFP) <b7> Geomorphology study (partner with Forest Service proposal for study/Aquatics Working Group)  PARKING LOT <b7> "How do we address upland areas?" <b7> Map of general project area, include transmission lines <b7> Upland area--importance of mountain goat <b7> Keys to access Shannon and Baker Lakes and gates up lake <b7> Develop "Area of Potential Effects" Map <b7> Coordinate with Terrestrial and Recreation Working Groups <b7> Glossary of terms: what are "protection," "mitigation," and "enhancement"? <b7> Develop TCP (Traditional Cultural Properties) studies <b7> Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources <b7> Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests <b7> Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations <b7> Cultural for DNR Land <b7> Cultural aspects of Forest and Fish Agreement  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/13/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   <b7> Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? <b7> Have tribal presentations on cultural/spiritual significance of resources <b7> Possibility of transplanting young cedar trees <b7> Availability of downed cedar for tribal use MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones <b7> Got out early! <b7> Marty! <b7> Off line preparation draft of APE rules <b7> Good food/coffee <b7> Finished 2001 list of accomplishments Opportunities for Improvement <b7> Missed Bob and Lee and Jason and Scott <b7> Too serious <ad> be funnier next time AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING-- January 8, 2002 noon to 4:00 p.m. at Forest Service Office <ad> Sedro-Woolley WA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items 4. Finalize APE 5. Discuss Methods for Testing and evaluating sites (Section V of Research Design) 6. Set agenda for February 12 meeting 7. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/13/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5    2001cultural20011113.pdf en 