BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Aquatic Resources Working Group July 12, 2001 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. US Forest Service Conference Room A/B (425-775-9702) 21905 64th Avenue West, Mountlake Terrace, WA  AGENDA 1. Review agenda and minutes 2. Review action items 3. Wild & Scenic River Presentation (Jim Chu, USFS) 4. Continue review of study plans and requests 5. Update on PSE operations model 6. Parking Lot 7. Set agenda for August 9 meeting (location TBD) 8. Evaluate meeting July 12, 2001  Driving Directions to US Forest Service Office: 1) Driving North from Seattle (or South from Everett) on I-5, take the 220th St. SW exit (exit 179). 2) Turn west (right if from southbound I-5, left if from northbound I-5) onto 220th St. SW. 3) Drive west about a block and turn right onto 64th Ave W. 4) The office building is about ¼ block down the street on the right side of the road. Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Aquatic Resources Working Group July 12, 2001 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA  MEETING NOTES Aquatics Working Group Mission: “To identify issues and develop solutions and recommendations addressing fish and aquatic resource interests related to the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement.”  Fish Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund, 425-462-3442, aaspel@puget.com PRESENT: Karen Kloempken (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Brady Green (U.S. Forest Service), Doug Bruland (PSE), Nick Verretto (PSE), Phil Hilgert (R2 Resource Consultants), Bill Reinard (Wildcat Steelhead Club), Don Schluter (Trout Unlimited, by phone), Lyn Wiltse (facilitator PDSA Consulting) Note: If unable to attend meetings, please notify Team Leader. AGENDA July 12, 2001 9:00 a.m.–2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.  Review Agenda and Minutes Review Action Items Jim Chu – Wild & Scenic River Presentation Study Requests/Plans Update on PSE Operations model Parking Lot  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 071201 minutes; Lyn Wiltse  1 of 6   7. Set Agenda for August 9 (location TBD) 8. Evaluate Meeting FUTURE DATES AND LOCATIONS Thursday, Aug. 9, 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. at the Mountlake Terrace USFS office; Thursday, Sept. 13, 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. at the new USFS office in Sedro Woolley (junction of Hwy. 9 and Hwy. 20), or default to Mountlake Terrace USFS office NEW ACTION ITEMS · ALL: Consider 2002 field season study requests (not already on list) to assist PSE with budget planning. Bring list to August 9 meeting. · ALL: Review Jim Chu’s handout (to be distributed by Nick) and be prepared with questions for his presentation (presentation will be rescheduled – cancelled 7/12 due to small audience · Phil: Put together a timeline for all study plans. · Fred: Talk with Terrestrial Group re: wetlands that are hydrologically but not directly connected to the river · Fred: Conduct ESA presentation at upcoming Aquatics WG mtg. · Don: Provide references on information on cutthroat and char passage through Cascades to Arnie by June 25. · Bob: Summarize current water quality data (by August 9 meeting) · Nick: See if Fred can do ESA presentation at our August 9 meeting. · Nick: Coordinate with DOE and Forest Service re: A-13 · Nick: Bring Study Request A22 to the Recreational Working Group. · Nick: Set up a Technical Working Group to address development of instream flow management agreement. · Nick: Bring color copies of Forest Service land ownership map to next meeting. · Brady: Try to reschedule Jim Chu to August meeting and give his handout to Nick to distribute to team members. · Stan: Invite Bob Hayman to present in November (update of Lower Skagit, fall Chinook, etc.). · Brady: Check out possibility of having our September 13th meeting at the new Forest Service Office (corner of Hwy 9 and Hwy 20) in Sedro-Woolley REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS · Arnie: By 6/15 sent out e-mail reminder to team members re: all study-related action items and their due dates. · ALL: Sent study-related comments directly to Sue (R-2) and copy Phil, Arnie, and Nick. · ALL: (especially Stan): Got any available fish spawning habitat information (supports A-1B study plan development) to Sue by June 25, or call R-2 (They will pick up!) · Chuck: Summarize A-10 data by September meeting. · Brady and Others: Got Sue input for A-20 by 6/29. · Tony: Sent map data to Don. · Sue: Put together a one-page summary of Type A vs. Type B data measurements/methods by 6/25. Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 071201 minutes; Lyn Wiltse  2 of 6   ·  Nick: Set up a conference call to get direction on level of survey (Type A/B) for A-1a.  STUDY REQUEST SUBMITTALS/STUDY PLAN DEVELOPMENT Study # Title Notes/Next Steps A01.A Reservoir Tributary Habitat Surveys Team members participated in a June 26, 2001 conference call to discuss this survey. Nick will distribute notes from this call by July 11. During the call they revised the study plan and Phil distributed the updated version. He attached a copy of the base map and tables of detailed habitat surveys, outlining which surveys were Type A/B coverage. We are now moving to implementation. If anyone has any concerns, let Sue/Phil know ASAP, as they are putting together the study schedule for August. Brady brought up the issue of limited Forest Service funds available. R-2 will contact the Park Service to see if they can assist with the survey. A01.B Reservoir Tributary Biological Surveys We are trying to inventory available data before going out and re-surveying streams. Phil distributed a one-page summary of spawning survey data derived from raw data provided by Stan. Phil is trying to figure out which streams have two years of continuous survey coverage. There are still additional data to insert into these tables. The next step will be to identify gaps in the existing data and recommend surveys accordingly. A01.C Reservoir Tributary Delta Surveys The study design was distributed prior to the last meeting. They are moving to implementation. The field work is slated to begin in September. Any additional comments, please let Phil/Sue know ASAP A02 LB River Habitat Mapping We are moving to implementation. This will be done in September, 2001 and Spring, 2002. A03 Reservoir Fish Population R-2 is still awaiting data for reservoir fish Characteristics population. Karen will prod Gary for data. A04 LB/Skagit River Flow, Gaging Ongoing A05 Water Quality Sampling Nick is still drafting this request. He will coordinate with Ecology, then USFS. A06 UB Passage Design Baffle Modification Ongoing. There will be a Fish Passage A08 UB Passage System Evaluation Technical Design Team meeting August 1st. The results of the study will be presented at our August 9th, meeting. Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 071201 minutes; Lyn Wiltse  3 of 6   A07  Lower Baker Forebay Bathymetric Survey A09 Skagit River Flow and Habitat Assessment (HIGH PRIORITY) A24: Hydrologic and Geomorphic Analysis  A10  Baker River Delta Habitat AssessmentChar  A11 A12 A13  Nutrient Addition Instream Flows for Biodiversity Water Quality Assessment  A14 A15  Reservoir Shoreline Erosion UB Delta Scour  A16 A17  Lower Baker Delta/Channelization Tributaries Surveys Upstream of Barriers A18 Baker River Survey Upstream of 1 km. A19 Review Limnological Information A20 Large Woody Debris Management  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 071201 minutes; Lyn Wiltse  This will be conducted July 17th and 1th8. We are working on getting bottom contour. Phil is working on a Baker flow management model (based on 80 years of flow data), with the intent to protect redds with acceptable (undefined at this point) impact to project operations. He is looking at what volume of water is needed at 2/3 of the spawning flow (10 day rolling average during the spawning period.) He distributed an example graph for discussion. This is not a PSE proposal. We are looking at scheduling a Technical Working Group to address this critical issue before this fall. Possible dates July 26 m(a.m.), 27, 30, August 2, 3 or the next working group mtg. Of Aug. 9. Nick will be setting up this meeting. Chuck went out on June 15,2001, to get full pool data. We’ll get his report at our September meeting. Parking Lot - not for 2001. Split between A09 and A21. Still being fleshed out (keep separate from A05). Not for 2001 - Needs further development. Phil suggested that rather than measure scour and fill in distributary channels (as Stan originally suggested), we try to draw a more direct correlation between scour, fill and redds. R-2 will send out a revised study plan to reflect this broader scope. The Forest Service likes this expanded scale of the study. We would be looking at the area (riverine, delta, lakeshore) use, current and pre-project populations, and associated risks with each. R-2 will send out a revised Study Plan and get with Stan separately prior to our next meeting. Pending – Not for 2001. Still pending. Merged into A-01 Pending with A13 The Study Plan is in progress. If anyone is aware of any permitting process for large woody debris removal in the Baker 4 of 6   A21 Skagit Wild & Scenic River Values  A22 Baker Lake Trout Impacts Evaluation  A23 Baker River Wild & Scenic River Values A24 Hydrologic and Geomorphic Analysis  Development let Arnie or Phil know ASAP. Does anyone know anything about ownership documents indicating who owns the wood? Partly being addressed in A09 and A24. This is still in progress. On June 20, Brady provided R-2 with a map of USFS ownership along the Skagit River below Baker Lake. The aim is to AD mark the Rainbow Trout planted in Depression and Baker Lakes to see if trout are over wintering and also see what they are eating. Do they survive long enough to contribute to the fishery? The marking has already been done. This request is still pending. It may not be necessary if PSE re-directs planting to Depression Lake only. Consensus of the group was that this might be a good idea. At this point, Puget has been directed by the State to increase stocking at Baker Lake and reduce stocking at Depression Lake. Trout Unlimited would like to see these studies moving forward with potential to identify interaction of species (non-native to native) and potential for brood stocking in the future (instead of the current Heinz 57 variety.) We will send this study to the Recreation Working Group for review. What would be the recreation impact of moving all stocking to Depression Lake? Defer to August 9 meeting. Moving to implementation. Looking at December 2001. (Folds into A09).  LIST OF MEETING HANDOUTS · Baker River Project Spawning Surveys · Study Plan A-01.A, Reservoir Tributary Habitat Surveys · Draft Conference Call Record, June 26, 2001, Baker River Project, FERC No. 2150 · Example Graph of Flow, Scour of Upper Baker Delta (Pre-development and Current) PARKING LOT · Presentation on Northwest Forest Plan including Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (USFS) in fall? · Presentation on ESA (direct relationship to 4(d) ) Fred/August · State agency presentations re: mandates (agency direction) · Create a master list of possible studies across all working groups and share with all · Access to the Baker River Project hourly operational model Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 071201 minutes; Lyn Wiltse  5 of 6   EVALUATION OF MEETING Well-Dones · Nick’s food · Stan notified he could not attend today - Thanks! · Smooth running meeting · Got through all R-2 studies · Forest Service for hosting Opportunities to Improve · Need better attendance · Need members to notify Team Leader if going to miss Tentative Agenda for Next Meeting August 9, 2001 9:00 a.m. - 2:30 p.m. US Forest Service Office Mountlake Terrace, WA 1. 2. 3. 4.  Review Agenda and Minutes Review Action Items Start Review of Study Requests/Plans Presentations · Wild and Scenic Rivers – Jim Chu? · ESA – Fred Seavey? 5. Continue Review of Study Requests/Plans 6. Set Agenda for September 13 meeting (USFS Office in Sedro-Woolley?), determine location for 10/11 mtg. 7. Evaluate Meeting  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 071201 minutes; Lyn Wiltse  6 of 6    2001aquatic20010712.pdf en 