BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group June 12, 2001 12:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 AGENDA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items <b7> Disposition of artifacts -Curation costs -Other <b7> Finalize Unanticipated Discovery Plan <b7> Review Confidentiality Document and Communications Protocol for reference to confidentiality - Draft of Confidentiality Document <b7> Discuss scheduling of additional survey work - Review site locations <b7> Discussion of APE 4. Set agenda and location for July 10, August 14 5. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Working Group June 12, 2001 12:00 p.m. <ad> 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: "To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process." Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com PRESENT: Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Gail Thompson (Historical Research Associates), Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Ardis Bynum by phone (U.S. Forest Service), John Boggs (Concrete Heritage Museum), Lee Stilson (Department of Natural Resources), Rob Whitlam by phone (Office of Archaeology & Historic Presentation), Gary Wessen (Wessen & Associates), Ernie DeCoteau (Sauk Suiattle Tribe), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) The meeting started at 12:25 and ended at 3:30 p.m. FUTURE MEETING DATES July 10, August 14, September 11, October 9 (at Marblemount) ANNOUNCEMENTS <b7> Jessie received an email from Jan Hollenbeck reminding this group that Bob Mierendorf represents Mt. Baker/Snoqualmie National Forest. This needs to be reflected in our meeting notes. <b7> Bob Mierendorf has offered to host our October meeting at Marblemount so he can give an overview of Ross Lake work. The group tentatively accepted his invitation for October 9.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 6/12/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Were reminded to give Jessie feedback on expected studies for the 2002 field season. She will be contacting the Tribes separately for their feedback. Members were encouraged to use the Study Request Form for additional studies/especially re: baseline studies (as a prerequisite for the licensing requests). <b7> Scott, Larry, Jason: Run confidentiality draft document by Tribal Councils for feedback. <b7> Bob: Calculate curation costs at Park Facility. <b7> Gail: Contact Frank from FERC re: their confidentiality protocols and whether PSE can be delegated to consult with OAHP and the Tribes. <b7> Jessie: Continue to work with others to put a plan in place to protect drawdown zone in the fall. <b7> Gary: Prepare outline of UDP training and send to Jessie by July 3 for distribution to team members. <b7> HRA: Finalize Unanticipated Discovery Plan and send to PSE to review. <b7> Connie: Check re: timing of FERC response to PSE's request to remove transmission lines from FERC boundary. <b7> Jessie: Draft summary of this team's accomplishments and collaborative process for review at July meeting. <b7> Jessie: See that APEs are discussed at PSE Team Leader Meetings. <b7> Gail: Prepare list/map of APE discrepancies for review/recommendations at July meeting. (Send to Jessie by July 3 to distribute).  June 12, 2001, from noon to 4:00 p.m. at PSE Office, Mount Vernon, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items <b7> Disposition of artifacts <b7> Curation costs <b7> Other <b7> Finalize Unanticipated Discovery Plan <b7> Discuss relationship of Confidentiality Document to Communications Protocol and Process Document <b7> Discuss scheduling of additional survey work <b7> Review site locations <b7> Discussion of APE 4. Set agenda and location for July 10, August 14th 5. Evaluate meeting  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> All were reminded to give Jessie feedback on possible study costs for 2002 season. She will be contacting the Tribes separately for their feedback. Members were reminded to use the Study Request Form for additional studies, especially for any baseline studies. <b7> Gary: Confirmed that the W. Pass Dike was manmade, not a "natural" area. Studies on the ground also showed that Horseshoe Cove was also extensively disturbed. Gary brought two sets of maps  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 6/12/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   showing the survey coverage of the sites identified so far. HRA is preparing to give these maps to R-2 for GIS overlays. They will address the issue of confidentiality related to info on sites and will also send photos of the artifacts to the tribes. The group appreciates the hard work and commitment by PSE's Tony Fuchs on getting these maps created. <b7> Jessie: Sent Confidentiality Document draft to Stan, Norma, Scott, Larry Wasserman, Larry Campbell, Shari, Jason, Ernie with a note to pass it on. Included explanation of what it is and why we're passing it on (to include in Communication Protocol/Process Document <b7> Jessie: Checked with Tony re: a map of the drawdown zone. Tony gave Lyn a copy of the map to use at this meeting. HRA also brought their copies. <b7> Jessie: Got update from Tony/Connie re: protection plans for Memorial Day weekend. During that weekend, the pool was just below full pool, so there wasn't a problem with the public disturbing the drawdown zone. PSE will talk with Gary and the tribes to attempt to address this issue before the fall. <b7> Connie: re: Communications Protocol and Process Document: the agencies got together to draft new version. PSE is setting up a meeting or conference call to share PSE's reaction to this version of these documents. They will try to do this before the Solution Team meeting June 27th. Connie and John will keep us posted. ARTIFACTS Gary reported that they consciously minimized the collection of artifacts for the Baker and Shannon work. They only collected 12 prehistoric artifacts from Baker, with no more than 2 or 3 artifacts collected from any one site. No more than 23 historic artifacts were collected from Baker. Only 2 prehistoric artifacts and fewer than 15 historic artifacts were collected from Shannon. The consultants will retain all artifacts until a more suitable disposition has been determined. It was noted that the Forest Service has jurisdiction over the Baker artifacts. UNANTICIPATED DISCOVERY PLAN Gail distributed a revised draft of this plan for the team to review. She walked through the comments she had received from team members and explained how they were incorporated into the document. It was noted that this plan is just interim until the Cultural Resources Management Plan has been implemented. HRA will create another draft addressing the concerns expressed at this meeting and send it to PSE for review before PSE sends it to the Tribes for comment. Training will be a part of implementing the plan. Gary will prepare an outline of a typical training for our review at our July 10 meeting. CONFIDENTIALITY DOCUMENT Gail walked the group through the Draft Confidentiality Document prepared by Bob Mierendorf (dated April 16). This document will serve as a resource for this team as we encounter issues in the future. Rob brought up the fact that FERC has a separate confidentiality process. Gail stated that in FERC filings, confidential and/or sensitive documents are only included in copies that go to FERC cultural contacts. Ernie reminded us that confidentiality issues and interpretations differ among the Tribes as does what confidentiality would apply to.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 6/12/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   SCHEDULING OF ADDITIONAL SURVEY WORK There is some additional work to be done in each of the drawdown zones. The scheduling for both of these will depend on pool levels. There is also survey work to be done within the APE above full pool. Some of these areas are highly vegetated. It would make sense to do this survey work in the absence of recreational visitors and when the vegetation is not so thick - perhaps this work could be combined with the additional drawdown zone work in the fall? Gary suggested early October at the earliest. It isn't likely that all this would occur in a single field session. There are probably two weeks of survey work remaining to be done this field season. FERC NOTE When PSE sends out the Unanticipated Discovery Plan, they will also summarize what has been done in the Working Group to date. It is important to keep FERC informed since it is unclear whether PSE will be using the traditional or ALP. DISCUSSION OF AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECTS (APE) HRA compared the current FERC boundary to the proposed APE boundary. Where the boundaries differ, we need resolution. We may also need clarification from FERC. TERRESTRIAL STUDIES Jessie distributed copies of the proposed vegetation mapping studies to be done by the Terrestrial Working Group. That Working Group would like additional information from this Working Group to supplement the list of culturally sensitive plants/community types supplied to them by Shari Brewer at their last meeting. TRADITIONAL CULTURAL PROPERTIES STUDIES PSE is in the process of deciding when to talk with the Tribes regarding TCPs. It will probably be late summer and will be handled outside this Working Group. The Working Group would provide support for this process only at the request of the Tribes. LIST OF MEETING HANDOUTS <b7> UNANTICIPATED DISCOVERY PLAN (Draft 6-11-01) <b7> BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSING STUDY REQUEST by Donald Gay, USDA Forest Service, Study Title: Basin Vegetation Mapping R-T15 <b7> BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSING STUDY REQUEST by PSE, Study Title: Vegetation Mapping in the Project Area R-T2 PARKING LOT <b7> "How do we address upland areas?" <b7> Map of general project area, include transmission lines <b7> Upland area--importance of mountain goat <b7> Keys to access Shannon and Baker Lakes and gates up lake  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 6/12/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   <b7> Develop "Area of Potential Effects" Map <b7> Coordinate with Terrestrial and Recreation Working Groups <b7> Glossary of terms: what are "protection," "mitigation," and "enhancement"? <b7> Develop TCP (Traditional Cultural Properties) studies <b7> Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources <b7> Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests <b7> Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations <b7> Cultural for DNR Land <b7> Cultural aspects of Forest and Fish Agreement <b7> Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? <b7> Have tribal presentations on cultural/spiritual significance of resources <b7> Possibility of transplanting young cedar trees <b7> Availability of downed cedar for tribal use  MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones: <b7> Great food ! <b7> Finished early <b7> Excellent quality of discussion on each item <b7> Maintained focus <ad> continued forward <b7> Ernie! <b7> Rob and Ardis (phone participation) <b7> Lee's humor <b7> Jessie's technical prowess with phone Opportunities for Improvement: <b7> Need coffee <b7> Need ice cream <b7> Missed Bob, Larry, Shari  AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING-- July 10, 2001, from noon to 4:00 p.m. at PSE Office, Mt Vernon, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items <b7> Preview potential 2002 studies <b7> Disposition of artifacts (interim vs. long-term curation standards) <b7> Discussion of APE Define next steps (confer with Tribes, FERC) <b7> Review summary of this team's accomplishments to date (Jessie) <b7> Review of Gary's training outline (to accompany UDP) 4. Set agenda and location for August 14, September 11 meetings 5. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 6/12/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5    2001cultural20010612.pdf en 