BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group July 10, 2001 12:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 AGENDA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items <b7> Preview potential 2002 studies <b7> Disposition of artifacts (interim vs. long-term curation standards) <b7> Discussion of APE Define next steps (confer with Tribes, FERC) <b7> Review summary of this team's accomplishments to date (Jessie) <b7> Review of Gary's training outline (to accompany UDP) 4. Set agenda and location for August 14, September 11 meetings 5. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Working Group July 10, 2001 12:00 p.m. <ad> 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273  MEETING NOTES  Mission: "To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process."  Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com  PRESENT: Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Gail Thompson (Historical Research Associates), Ardis Bynum by phone (U.S. Forest Service), John Boggs (Concrete Heritage Museum), Larry Campbell (Swinomish Tribe), Gary Wessen (Wessen & Associates), Alex Maass (Historical Research Associates), Bob Mierendorf (NPS, representing Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest) Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting)  The meeting started at 12:15 and ended at 3:00 p.m.  FUTURE MEETING DATES August 14, September 11, October 9 (at Marblemount), November 13  NEW ACTION ITEMS  <b7> ALL: Consider questions for Deborah Wood (North Cascades National Park curator). <b7> ALL: Review Cultural Resource Management Plan information and be ready to brainstorm potential interim measures at August meeting.  <b7> ALL: Review list of this team's accomplishments. Be ready to give Jessie feedback by July 24. <b7> Jessie: Check status of PSE plans to build a new visitor center. <b7> Jessie: Reports on APE's defined by other Working Groups. <b7> Jessie & Gary: Draft preliminary list of who might take what training.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/10/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   <b7> Gail: Send sample Cultural Resources Management Plan to Jessie to distribute. <b7> Bob: Check with Seattle City Light re: sharing a Cultural Resource Management Plan <b7> John: Check out Concrete locations for August/September meetings <b7> Scott, Larry, Jason: Run confidentiality draft document and Unanticipated Discovery Plan by Tribal Councils for feedback. <b7> Jessie: Continue to work with others to put a plan in place to protect drawdown zone in the fall  July 10, 2001, from noon to 4:00 p.m. at PSE Office, Mt Vernon, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items <b7> Preview potential 2002 studies <b7> Disposition of artifacts (interim vs. long-term curation standards) <b7> Discussion of APE Define next steps (confer with Tribes, FERC) <b7> Review summary of this team's accomplishments to date (Jessie) <b7> Review of Gary's training outline (to accompany UDP) 4. Set agenda and location for August 14, September 11 meetings 5. Evaluate meeting  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Were reminded to give Jessie feedback on expected studies for the 2002 field season Members were encouraged to use the Study Request Form for any additional studies they want to propose. <b7> Gary: Prepared outline of UDP training and sent to Jessie by July 3 for distribution to team members. <b7> HRA: Finalized Unanticipated Discovery Plan and sent to PSE to review. <b7> Connie: Checked re: timing of FERC response to PSE's request to remove transmission lines from FERC boundary. We should hear by late August . <b7> Jessie: Drafted summary of this team's accomplishments and collaborative process for review at July meeting. <b7> Jessie: Saw that APEs were discussed at PSE Team Leader Meetings. She will continue to check in with other Baker Team Leaders.  NEW TOPICS <b7> Jessie distributed a calendar showing the timeline and major steps associated with the traditional vs. alternative licensing processes. <b7> She also distributed a paper that PSE authored in response to the Forest Service position with regard to baseline and continuing impacts. The paper was titled "Relicensing Issues-Scope and Content of Scientific Studies/June 19, 2001". <b7> PSE is still awaiting a response from FERC re: excluding the transmission lines from the FERC boundary. T-line use was primary at the time of the original project license. Since then, their use has changed and they are no longer primary lines. PSE feels their new definition should exclude them from the official FERC boundary. They are hoping to hear a determination from FERC by the end of August.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/10/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   <b7> Gail called Frank Winchell from FERC. He told her that when submitting materials to FERC we should mark confidential reports "Confidential: Not for Public Disclosure". We should send a copy to Frank and write a letter to the commission saying that we've sent Frank the report. We should make sure all team members have equal access to that material. <b7> Frank said that PSE should ask FERC to delegate consultation ASAP. They should send a letter requesting that the Commission give PSE the authority to conduct Section 106 consultation pursuant to 36 CFR 800.2c4 (it's with SHPOs, THPOs, and others). They should be sure to copy the letter to SHPO, ACHP, and all work group members. Frank will send a return letter to everyone, granting the authorization. It doesn't matter whether PSE later selects the traditional or alternative licensing process. 2002 STUDIES By the end of August, Jessie needs a plan, including justification, for new 2002 studies. <b7> Larry reported that the tribes are contemplating an ethnobotany survey. He will check with Tony Fuchs, team leader of the Terrestrial Working Group, to see how tribal needs are already being addressed in other studies. <b7> Erosion Deposition and Geomorphology Study needed to get a better understanding of changes in reservoir landforms and to identify most dynamic areas. <b7> Traditional Cultural Properties: (Larry thinks Tribes may want to defer this to 2003). DISPOSITION OF ARTIFACTS Bob spoke with the Park Curator, Deborah Wood. She will address the group when Bob hosts our October 9, 2001 meeting. She will also give us a tour of the curation facility at that time. She reported that the Park's 1999 management cost for pre-contact age collection was $35/cubic ft. She estimated that our costs would be at least $50/cubic ft. Larry will be looking at opportunities for artifacts (especially anything prehistoric) to be returned to the tribes. We could also write into an agreement the intent to turn artifacts over to the tribes when they have developed their own curation facilities. AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECTS Historical Research Associates prepared a map of places where the proposed Area of Potential Effects went outside the project boundary or vice versa. They brought maps including areas we have located and where the APE and the project boundary differ. After meeting off-line with Jessie to discuss the discrepancies, they decided to work with the APE rather than the project boundary for us to use as a baseline. A project is underway to merge the Forest Service and PSE data bases so we will have contour intervals above and within the project boundary. After HRA gets the contour maps, they will reassess the appropriateness of the proposed APE. This will be an ongoing process that this team will continually address. Larry expressed concern that adequate upland areas be included in the APE. We will continue to refine the APE over the course of the license. In doing so, we need to consider property ownership.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/10/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   SUMMARY OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS Jessie distributed the draft summary of this team's accomplishments that she prepared and asked members to give her feedback on the list by July 24. We will use this list to keep FERC, SHIPO, tribes and others up to date on what we've been doing.  GARY'S TRAINING OUTLINE Gary walked the group through the outline he prepared on Cultural Resource Training. He suggested that the level of training be targeted to the needs of specific employees, depending on their jobs. He also said that this training could not be effectively accomplished in a single day. A next step might be for the PSE managers and the Forest Service staff to attend this as well. The cultural management plan should require PSE to offer this training on an ongoing basis at different times and possibly open it up to the public. There could be a refresher course for staff as well as a way to orient new employees. We may also want to develop a packet of handouts for consultants who are doing contract work in the project area. Next steps: Jessie will get PSE feedback re: the Unanticipated Discovery Plan. We will need to work with Charles Morton (plant manager) to integrate this training into daily operations.  PSE OPERATIONS What can we do between now and when we write the Management Plan to protect cultural resources in the midst of daily plant operations? The group agreed to begin drafting a list of interim management measures to recommend implementing prior to the Cultural Resources Management Plan. These measures will become part of the Cultural Resource Management Plan. To manage the plan over the long term, we need policy level people meeting with the tribes on an ongoing basis. It was suggested that we look at a sample Cultural Resource Management Plans and then brainstorm potential interim measures at our next meeting.  LIST OF MEETING HANDOUTS  <b7> 2001/2004 Timeline for Alternative FERC Relicensing Process <b7> 2001/2004 Timeline for Traditional FERC Relicensing Process <b7> Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group <ad> Progress Report, July 2001 <b7> Proposed Training Program Elements for Cultural Resource Training for Baker <b7> "Relicensing Issues Scope and Content of Scientific Studies" <ad> PSE June 2001  PARKING LOT <b7> "How do we address upland areas?" <b7> Map of general project area, include transmission lines <b7> Upland area--importance of mountain goat <b7> Keys to access Shannon and Baker Lakes and gates up lake <b7> Develop "Area of Potential Effects" Map and consider property ownership <b7> Coordinate with Terrestrial and Recreation Working Groups  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/10/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   <b7> Glossary of terms: what are "protection," "mitigation," and "enhancement"? <b7> Develop TCP (Traditional Cultural Properties) studies <b7> Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources <b7> Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests <b7> Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations <b7> Cultural for DNR Land <b7> Cultural aspects of Forest and Fish Agreement <b7> Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? <b7> Have tribal presentations on cultural/spiritual significance of resources <b7> Possibility of transplanting young cedar trees <b7> Availability of downed cedar for tribal use <b7> PSE: Put together a history of the dam project  MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones: <b7> Great food <b7> Very efficient <b7> Got through agenda on time <b7> Fast facilitation <b7> Larry's participation <b7> Good consensus on issues  Opportunities for Improvement: <b7> Phone participant...didn't have all material ahead of time. <b7> Missed Lee, Rob, Shari, Scott, Ernie and Connie  AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING AUGUST 14, 2001, from noon to 4:00 p.m. at ????????? 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Gary's Archeological Slide Presentation 4. Action Items <b7> Preview potential 2002 studies <b7> APE Update <b7> Create list of items for Deborah Wood (North Cascades National Park Curator) to address at October meeting <b7> What it takes to construct a curation facility, etc. <b7> Brainstorm list of potential interim management measures <b7> Review draft training list put together by Jessie and Gary <b7> Feedback on this team's accomplishments to date 4. Set agenda and location for September 11, October 9 meetings 5. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/10/01 MEETING L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5    2001cultural20010710.pdf en 