 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group Meeting November 21, 2002 (8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m.) (Bring Sack Lunch) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) AGENDA Review notes/revise agenda/action items Report on Studies: • Status of existing studies: T2, T4, T5, T7, T11, T13, T15, T16, T17 PME Matrix Development Solution Team Update New Study Plans: • T6 Noxious Weeds, T7b Future Vegetation, T19 HEP, T20 Drawdown wildlife, T21 Elk, T22 Fluctuation Zone Enhancement How are we going to evaluate our data? New Study Requests (?), New Teamlet meetings (?) Set agenda/location for December 19th, meeting location/dates for January, February, March Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group November 21, 2002 8:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. US Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) FINAL MEETING MINUTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations, addressing terrestrial and wildlife resource interests for the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement that: • accurately defines and describes the existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; • identifies project effects (existing and proposed) leading to development • of protection, mitigation, and enhancement options.” Team Leader: Tony Fuchs, (Phone) 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com ATTENDEES: Bob Nelson, (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation), Gene Stagner (U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service), Bob Kuntz (NPS), Tony Fuchs, Cary Feldmann (Puget Sound Energy), Lauri Vigue (Washington Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Ann Risvold, Laura Potash and Carl Corey (USFS), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific Environmental Sciences, Inc.), Tom Hamer and Erin Colclazier (Hamer Environmental), Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics) and Bruce Freet (Environmental Agreements), Lyn Wiltse (PDSA Consulting, facilitator). SCHEDULE FOR FUTURE WORKING GROUP MEETINGS: Regular meetings: Dec. 19, Jan 16 (Lacey?), Feb 20 (Mt. Vernon?), March 20. April 17, May15, June 19 (location?), July 17, Aug. 21 (location?), Sept. 18, Oct.16, Nov.20 (location?), Dec.18 from 8:30 to 2:00 at the USFS Building, Mountlake Terrace unless otherwise specified. PME meetings: Dec. 5 in Lacey (Sawyer Hall in Lacey) INTRODUCTIONS We welcomed new member Laura Potash from the Forest Service. Laura will be assuming Ann Risvold’s duties in this process. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 1 of 8 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Agenda for November 21, 2002, 8:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. Mountlake Terrace, WA Bring a sack lunch and we’ll work through! 1. Review notes/agenda/action items 2. PME Matrix development 3. Report from Elk Teamlet (T21); HEP Teamlet (T19) 4. Report from Visioning Exercise 5. Studies: T4, T5, T7,T11,T13, T15, T16, T17 6. New Study Plans: T6 (Noxious Weeds), T7b (Future vegetation) 7. Existing New Requests 8. New Study Plans for Review • T20 Drawdown Wildlife Survey • T22 Flux Zone Enhancement 9. Solution Team Update 10. Set agenda and location for December 19th meeting, meeting dates/locations for Jan-Mar, 2003 11. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTIONS • ALL: Review T12(Grizzly Bear) Study/rationale and be ready to discuss at our December meeting. • ALL: : Get comments on T6 study plan, T11, 13, 16, 17 reports by year end to Tony • Tony: Talk with Kristen re: some website hyper links not functioning; also re: setting up internal “protected” web site • Tony: Send Bob K pdf file of wetland map • Tony: Call Russ Paul (Crown Pacific) re: PME participation • Tony: Pull together teamlet to discuss next steps in wetland study (early January). • Patrick: Bring his photos from trip to France. • Tony: Set up HEP teamlet meeting in early December. • Tony: Send out notification email when T15 coverages are ready for review (should be ready by Dec. 6. • Marty: Email “final” draft final for T7, dated November 21,2002, along with the maps for final review. • Bob Kuntz: Check with DOI botanist about joining with teamlet for PME 106 • Marty: Work with Patrick to draft a new PME: 114 Public Lands • Marty: Send out next draft of PMEs by Monday November 25 • Dee: Send out Agenda for December 5 workshop (and other information for meeting) by Monday December 2. • Ann: Get Tom locations of six sites that need plant forms filled out. • Gene: Check availability of meeting in Lacey for January 16th • Tony: Set up Elk teamlet meeting and get Ron out to see the sights. • Marty: Frame issue around: What percentage of the overall recreation in the Basin is due to the Project? • Tony: Check availability of PSE Office for February 20 meeting. • Lyn: Update Norms to remind members to silence cell phones. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 2 of 8 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Got comments to Marty on T7 by November 7. • ALL: Provided comments on Draft Final Rare Plant Report, Terrestrial Mollusk, and Spotted Frog studies. The Amphibian Draft Report will be out by November 29th. • ALL: Let Dee know if you have any concerns with the PME matrix by end of day Monday, October 28. • Tony: Followed-up with Bob re: NPS wetland maps. • Tom: Asked Lia to talk with Marty re: updating Analysis Species rationale. • Tony: Set up Basin Vegetation Map teamlet (T15) with Don, Marty, Joetta, Ron and maybe Lauri after September 24. Tony and Don met immediately after our last meeting (Oct. 24). To discuss this. • Marty: Sent out suggested list of PMEs for review by end of day on October 31 (using format suggested by Bruce). • Tony: Sent out revised PME format to all (deleted “PME” section). • Tony: Checked with Joetta re: grizzly cover for Elk. • Tony: Set up Elk Teamlet conference call. • Erin: Sent out (and also distributed) a revised version of T2 sample classifications. • Tony: Distributed an updated status list of all studies with the most recent revision date. • Tony: Sent out notification e-mails when T7 coverages are ready for final review. • Don: Sent out potential draft of PME for mountain goats (using format distributed by Bruce) for our review prior to the next meeting. REPORT ON STUDIES Status on existing studies: See table below for summary of status of T2, T4, T5, T7, T11, T13, T15, T16, and T17. PME MATRIX UPDATE The PME teamlet met November 8 to review the preliminary PMEs drafted by Marty and determine next steps. Tony distributed draft notes from that meeting. We reviewed each of the PME drafts (100-114) and confirmed the lead person and membership for each draft PME. The next meeting will be an all day workshop on Dec. 5 at the USFWS Office in Lacey. Bruce shared with us a tentative schedule between now and October 2003: Dec. 16-19 2002 1st draft PMEs complete Jan. 2003 Refine PMEs and Prepare for Feb workshops Questions Feb. 2003 Working Group Meetings and Begin Workshops Mar. 2003 Continue workshops Complete 2nd draft PMEs Meet with Berger Group for PDEA Apr. 2003 Present 2nd draft PMEs to Baker Solution Team May 2003 PSE/Berger Group release PDEA for internal, participant review (30-45 days) July 2003 Complete 3rd draft PMEs Oct. 2003 PSE/Berger Group release PDEA for public review (90 days) Oct-Dec 2003 FERC issues a request for preliminary terms, conditions and recommendations BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 3 of 8 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Use PME titles that can stand alone and tell the desired outcome • Start working on PMEs that are “relatively” easy and build on success as you develop other PMEs • Divide into smaller Working Groups or teamlets by interest and expertise Measurable Objectives: • Implementation • Effectiveness REQUEST FOR INFORMATION FROM THE RECREATION WORKING GROUP The Recreation Working Group is coming up with GIS layer information for potential trail routing. They have asked for our input in weighting ecologically sensitive areas so they can use them as a course filter. They want low, medium, and high weightings for each of the constraints (e.g., rare plants, forage, wetlands, etc.). They need our input re: buffers for riparian and wetland zones. We agreed they should consult the Northwest Forest Plan for guidance in setting these buffers. 150 ft. may be insufficient in some cases (for particularly sensitive species and connectivity). We may want to suggest buffers of 200 – 300 ft. We may want larger buffers for campgrounds and trails. Lauri will be on the GIS teamlet for this group and they will be able to assign weightings to wetland areas based, in part, on the amphibian and spotted frog surveys we did. Tony, and Tom will join that teamlet to help. SOLUTION TEAM UPDATE Lyn reported that FERC representatives attended the October Solution Team meeting and Dee and Bruce presented the broad categories being considered by the various Working Groups for PMEs. The Solution Team asked the Economics/Operations Working Group to draft a statement that all working groups could use as an assumption re: flood control for PMEs. NEW STUDY PLANS See table below for updates on status of: T6 Noxious Weeds, T7b Future Vegetation, T19 HEP, T20 Wildlife in the Drawdown Zone, T21 Elk, T22 Fluctuation Zone Enhancement HOW ARE WE GOING TO EVALUATE OUR DATA? This will be a continual discussion. We are getting clearer on this with each study. Study Title Notes/Next Steps # T2 Vegetation Mapping in Project Erin distributed a handout summarizing progress to date on Area the vegetation cover-type mapping for the Project area. All mapping above the drawdown zone is complete. Mapping in the draw down zone is in draft form. Next steps will include merging the cover types onto the T5 wetland and polygons. The executive summary will be out by December 19. Updated classification in the inundation zone will be out by Thanksgiving. T4 Analysis Species Assessment Twenty-four species have been sent out to date. Others (all BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 4 of 8 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 28) will be out by Nov. 22. All were encouraged to give feedback (completeness and connection to Project effect) to Tony by January 16. Use the “insert comment” feature if possible. We will discuss how to revise these lists at our January 16 meeting. Keep in mind these are support document for the other work we are doing. These documents will be dynamic. We will be incorporating new information along the way. T5 Wetland Inventory Study Erin showed us the updated wetland map. It now includes all the classifications we discussed at our October meeting. Bob Kuntz will review it for completeness. Next steps: Teamlet will meet in early January to determine if wetland monitoring needs to be done. T6 Noxious Weed Assessment and Tom incorporated Ann and Laurel’s comments and sent out Control Plan the “final” plan last week. Tony suggested we revisit this in April in preparation for the fieldwork, which is set to start in May. Tom will incorporate the six sites that need plant siting sheets filled out into the Study Plan and we will call it “final”. T7 Historic Vegetation of the UB Marty incorporated comments from Don, Lauri and Ann. He and LB Projects walked us through the changes he made in the estimated acreage for each of the habitats delineated within the Project area. He will email out the final draft version (Nov. 21) of this report (with maps) to members for review. T7b Future vegetation mapping Marty met with sue and Phil (R2) to discuss decommissioning scenarios. They presented this to the Aquatics Working Group who accepted those assumptions. You would first take Upper Baker Dam out and leave Lower Baker in for five years (or so) to act as a sediment trap. Then you could gradually remove Lower Baker Dam as well. Marty will summarize all the assumptions and send them out for our review along with a spreadsheet showing the estimated rate of recovery for various habitats over the term of the license. T-9,10 Recreation use, effects on Mt. Don has drafted a PME for our review with regard to Goat Habitat use mountain goats. T11 Oregon Spotted Frog Inventory Tony will be sending out revised “final” Study Report by end of December. R-T12 Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging On hold depending on T15 and working group needs. Don Habitat Value emailed a write-up outlining the study need for our review by October 24th and we were to discuss at our October meeting. This has been deferred for discussion at our December 19th meeting. T13 Survey and Manage Terrestrial Tony will be sending out revised “final” Study Report by Mollusk Survey end of December. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 5 of 8 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 T15 Basin Vegetation Mapping The revised map will be out for review by years end. Phase 2 is wide open in terms of how we need to modify the map to meet our needs. T16 Project Area Rare Plant Survey “Final” report will be out also by year end. T17 Amphibian Studies in Reservoir The Draft Final report will be out the end of November. Fluctuation Zone R-T18 Breeding Bird Surveys On hold. R-T19 Habitat Evaluation Studies Tony reported that the HEP teamlet met in October. T7b will get us acres/years of habitat. The next step would be to assign values to come up with habitat units. Marty suggested we wait until we get the data from T4 and T7b before proceeding. This should help us know where to apply the HEP. The HEP teamlet will meet again via conference call in early December, in the meantime, we need to be sure any data gaps identified in T4 include habitat cover types. T7b will be looked at for site potential. RT20 Wildlife Use in the Reservoir Tony reported that since there doesn’t appear to be Drawdown Zone consensus among team members around doing this study, PSE will do it on its own and share the data. RT21 Elk studies Marty distributed notes from the Elk Teamlet meeting November 13. Lauri expressed concern that the Study had been slimmed down too much, since the Study Request had been originally approved in August 2002. Outstanding issues: • Availability/adequacy of Cook data • Reduction of scope from elk range to the basin-wide/ watershed. We also discussed the possibility of an elk Summit in 2003 with local experts. Next Steps: Get key folks together for a facilitated teamlet meeting (Dec. 6th). At this meeting, we would discuss concerns with the revised Study Plan. This would be a meeting to re-group and re-visit the aim and how best to accomplish that aim. We will do this prior to our December meeting. If we are unable to resolve the outstanding issues, we could decide to assign folks to write a white paper and bump it to the Solution Team for resolution. In the meantime we will get Ron out to look around before snowfall. • T22 Fluctuation Zone Enhancement Tony is working on finishing up the Study Plan. He will run it by Gene, Laura and others for review. We would want to do test planting at the start of the growing season (March- ish). We may need to start drafting a PME for this that is experimental. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 6 of 8 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 HANDOUTS (Those that will be posted to the website are bolded.) • Baker River Project, FERC No. 2150 Study Request Index • Baker River PROJECT, FERC No. 2150 Study Index • T2 Vegetation Classifications for Inundation Zone and Upland Grass/Sedge Polygons (11-12- 2002) • T2 Vegetation Mapping in the Project Area Update • Table 1. T2 Vegetation Cover types • Table 2. T2 Grass/Sedge Community Codes • T7; Table 1. Habitats present within the Baker River Project Area prior to inundation of Baker Lake reservoir and Lake Shannon • Meeting Notes from the Elk Habitat Teamlet (T21) November 13, 2002 PARKING LOT • Conceptual Mitigation Approach (PMEs) • Review time frame/goals of working groups/milestones • Definitions of “project boundary”, “project effects”, “previous environment”, “project area”, NEPA definitions • Watershed Analysis Presentation • Land Management – Do study? • Make list of all available relevant data. Create a subset of those data for Tony to always bring to meetings for group to continually reference. • Are transmission lines in or out of FERC boundary? • Changing Climate Patterns • Determine land management allocations within Project boundary • Interface with Access Management Plan MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones • Happy to have Laura! • Great food! • Very productive! • Good discussions • We dodged the bullet! Opportunities to Improve • Got out five minutes late • Missed Don, Stan WHAT’S HOT? • Bear Study • Project related recreation • PME schedule BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 7 of 8 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Elk Study TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR OUR DECEMBER 19 MEETING Mountlake Terrace, Washington 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. Bring a sack lunch and we’ll work through! 1. Review notes/agenda/action items 2. Report on Studies 3. PME Matrix development 4. Solution Team Update 5. New Study Plans – T12 (Grizzly Bear), others 6. New study plans for review 7. New Requests? 8. Report from preliminary assessment by PDEA contractor 9. Assessing the accuracy/evaluation of our data 10. Recreation Impacts Discussion 11. Confirm January location/(Lacey)? and Set Agenda for January 16, 2003 12. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 8 of 8 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  