BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Aquatic Resources Working Group February 14, 2002 8:30 a.m. <ad> 2:30 p.m. US Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 AGENDA 1. Review Agenda and Minutes 2. Review Action Items 3. Reports from Fish Passage Technical Working Group 4. Review Communication Protocol and Process Documents 5. Study Plans/Requests 6. Review list of 2001 Accomplishments 7. Additional Issues? 8. Set agenda for March 14, 2002 9. Evaluate Meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Aquatic Resources Working Group February 14, 2002 8:30 a.m. <ad> 2:30 p.m. USFS Office Mountlake Terrace, WA  MEETING NOTES Aquatics Working Group Mission: "To identify issues and develop solutions and recommendations addressing fish and aquatic resource interests related to the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement." Fish Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund, 425-462-3442, aaspel@puget.com PRESENT: Arnie Aspelund, Nick Verretto, Doug Bruland and Cary Feldmann (PSE), Sue Madsen and Emily Greenberg (R2), Mark Downen (WDFW), Stan Walsh (SSC), Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group), Gary Sprague (WDFW), Bill Reinard (Wildcat Steelhead Club), Chuck Ebel (U.S. Army Corps), Brady Green (USFS), Don Schluter (Trout Unlimited, by phone), Craig Addley, (Watershed Systems Group for USFS), Mark Killgore (Louis Berger Group), Lyn Wiltse (facilitator, PDSA Consulting, Inc.) Note: If unable to attend meetings, please notify Team Leader. FUTURE DATES AND LOCATIONS March 14, April 11, May 9, June 13 from 8:30 to 2:30 at USFS Office in Mountlake Terrace unless otherwise specified. NOTE: THE MARCH 14 MEETING WILL GO UNTIL 3:00. INTRODUCTIONS We welcomed Mark Downen from WDFW and Mark Killgore from The Louis Berger Group, and Emily Greenberg from R2. AGENDA  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 2-14-02_Final_fishWG_notes; Lyn Wiltse  1 of 8   February 14, 2002 8:30 a.m. <ad> 2:30 p.m. U. S. Forest Service Office Mountlake Terrace, WA 1. Review Agenda and Minutes 2. Review Action Items 3. Reports from Fish Passage Technical Working Groups <ad> Economic Working Group 4. Review Communication Protocol and Process Documents 5. Study Plans/Requests 6. Review list of 2001 Accomplishments 7. Additional Issues? 8. Set agenda for March 14, 2002 9. Evaluate Meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Get Arnie feedback on A14, A-26, A-36 by month end if possible. <b7> ALL: Give input (during meetings) to Mark Killgore re: questions, requirements. Invite anyone interested in evaluating the Charles Howard Model to attend our April 11 meeting at Mountlake Terrace or Economics April 10 at the PSE building at Mount Vernon. <b7> ALL: Give input re: Charles Howard Model questions, requirements (after the meeting) to Arnie. <b7> ALL: Let Sue know if you want additional copies of CD with Habitat tributaries pictures on them. <b7> Sue: Send out prioritization strawman and schedule by end of February for all to review. <b7> Nick: Follow-up with Don Schluter re: fish traps. <b7> Nick: Follow-up with Stan Zyskowski (Park Service) re: coordination on Little Park Creek sampling. <b7> Arnie: Get printout of adult returns (last season) to Arn Thoreen. <b7> Ruth: Draft Interest statements and accompanying issues for the Nature Conservancy <b7> Craig: Identify issues to be addressed in A9 Study Request and send to Sue/R2 by the end of February. <b7> Cary: Invite Steve and Fred's representative to present an overview of the IPP at our March meeting in relation to A9. <b7> Arnie: Button up with Recreation Working Group Team Leader re: A13 <b7> Nick: Meet with Brady and Greta re: A13. <b7> Gary: Get Arnie recommendation on fry sample size and medium as soon as possible. <b7> Don: Provide references on information on cutthroat and char passage through Cascades to Arnie.  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Sue: Got habitat tributary pictures put on CD and sent to interested members <b7> Bob Barnes: Provided Phil an estimate of the forebay gage accuracy <b7> Arnie: Invited Fred and Steve to help discuss A-09 at our meeting  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 2-14-02_Final_fishWG_notes; Lyn Wiltse  2 of 8   REPORTS ON ROAD CLOSURE AND LAND SLIDE Doug reported that the road above Horseshoe Cove is still closed due to heavy snow. It looks like it will be spring before the road will be plow-able. Cary reported that on February 5th a mud slide occurred on the right bank of the Baker River downstream of Lower Baker Dam. REPORT FROM FISH PASSAGE TECHNICAL WORKING GROUPS The Upstream and Downstream Fish Passage Design Groups met February 4th and 5th. They continue conceptual design development and alternatives selection, and focused discussion on 2002 downstream behavioral studies at Upper Baker. Nick distributed handouts and schedules outlining these studies, which are separated into near-field (acoustic tag tracking of coho and sockeye for three-dimensional identification of fish movement) and far-field (radio tag tracking) releases. The studies will test movement during two treatments: low pool vs. high pool, and generation on vs. generation off. The timeline will be the seven weeks beginning April 29. Three additional studies include: radio-tagged kelts release at the upper end of the reservoir, PIT-tag & recovery of coho and sockeye in the near- and far-fields, as well as continuation of past releases of freeze-branded coho groups. ECONOMICS/OPERATIONS WORKING GROUP The Economics/Operations Working Group has been on hiatus for most of the last year, as they await the completion of the hydro operations model. Mark Killgore reported that they have been going through an in-depth review of the Charles Howard Hydro Operations model. It is compatible with Excel and fairly user friendly. They are planning to do a 1-2 hour overview to demonstrate the model and begin to answer questions (including algorithms used) at our April meeting. They will be doing this overview for each of the Working Groups in the various resource areas. They will follow up with a comprehensive all-day workshop in May or June where any interested working group participant would be encouraged to attend along with any technical folks from their organizations to assist in reviewing the adequacy of the model. SCOPING DOCUMENT 1 AND INITIAL CONSULTATION DOCUMENT We discussed Connie's 2/12/02 memo explaining PSE's decision (at FERC's suggestion) to draft Scoping document 1 and issue it as a companion document to the Initial Consultation Document. All were reminded that the completion of Scoping Document 1 does not mean the end of the issue identification phase, and that PSE is sharing this initial draft in the spirit of collaboration. There will be a public meeting mid-May to discuss both documents and formal comments for the Scoping Document 1 will be due mid-June and for the ICD will be mid-July. COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL AND PROCESS DOCUMENT UPDATE Nothing new to report. The teamlet of agency and PSE attorneys continued their review and report that they are nearly complete with the Communication Protocol and Process Document. They are finishing up language around confidentiality and handling settlement. They hope to have these complete prior to the next Solution Team Meeting. It looks like PSE is going to  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 2-14-02_Final_fishWG_notes; Lyn Wiltse  3 of 8   request permission from FERC to use the Alternative Licensing Process at the end of the month. They will include these documents as part of their submission.  STUDY REQUEST SUBMITTALS/STUDY PLAN DEVELOPMENT  Study #  Title  Notes/Next Steps  A01.A Reservoir Tributary Habitat Surveys Emily gave a PowerPoint presentation  summary of the preliminary survey results.  This presentation will be available on the  website. The full report will be complete prior  to our March 14 meeting. Results will be used  to assess fish production potentials in the three  basins and also to identify areas for P/M/E  measures.  A01.B Reservoir Tributary Biological Surveys Not discussed at this meeting. We will have a  draft report this spring.  A01.C Reservoir Tributary Delta Surveys  Not discussed at this meeting. The delta  portions of tributaries in the drawdown zone  will be surveyed in the next few months. This  will be a supplemental report.  A02 LB River Habitat Mapping  No changes since last meeting.  A03 Reservoir Fish Population  No changes since last meeting.  Characteristics  A04 LB/Skagit River Flow, Gaging A05 Water Quality Sampling A06 UB Passage Design Baffle Modification A07 Lower Baker Forebay Bathymetric Survey A08 UB Passage System Evaluation A09A Skagit River Flow and Habitat Assessment (HIGH PRIORITY)  No changes since last meeting. No changes since last meeting. Complete. Complete. The study report from R-2 is complete. Arnie distributed a copy of the report generated through the Fish Passage Technical Working Group. The Interim Protection Plan is due February 15. The IPP concerns ESA issues for the remainder of the current license period. It may be useful as a reference going forward. After the IPP is complete we will reconsider our study plan and see if there are issues that have been resolved through the IPP and agree on next steps. The IPP addresses issues of flood control and supplementing low flows. A summary of this plan should be available for discussion at our March meeting. The IPP will be followed up shortly after with the Biological  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 2-14-02_Final_fishWG_notes; Lyn Wiltse  4 of 8   A09B Salmonid Redd Selection and Maintenance in the Middle Skagit in Response to River Fluctuation from Hydropower Peaking A09C Distribution, Timing and Depth of Salmonid Redds A09D Distribution, Timing of Salmonid Fry A10 Baker River Delta Habitat Assessment- Char A11 Nutrient Addition A12 Instream Flows for Bio-diversity A13A Water Quality Impacts of Human Uses of the Reservoir and Adjacent Shorelines. A13B Water Quality Impacts on Aquatic Habitat A14 Reservoir Shoreline Erosion A15 UB Delta Scour A16 Lower Baker River Alluvial Fan Assessment A17 Tributaries Surveys Upstream of Barriers A18 Baker River Survey Upstream of 1 km. A19 Review Limnological Information  Assessment. We agreed to move this to Study Plan (first priority is A9A). We'll address it by this summer. We'll submit the Study Plan for member review in June for discussion at July meeting. We are in the process of developing a Study Plan for this. Some preliminary work was already done last fall. These data will be incorporated into the plan. Submit Study Plan in June for discussion at July meeting. Stan suggested a snorkeling contingency if can't get a permit.. Need Study Plan by March. Complete. Note: USFW is concerned with impacts to char and indirectly to bald eagles through chum and also to cutthroat. Not Discussed. Parking Lot. Not Discussed. Split between R-A21 & RA09. We discussed reservoir/road/toilet <ad>induced recreation. Arnie will follow up with Recreation Working Group re: existing data and possible PMEs. Nick and Brady will discuss this offline with Greta. Nick and Arnie will discuss this offline. R2 has created an internal Study Plan Draft. They will send it out for team member review very soon and get in the field as soon as possible. Should have Study Plan in March. Not discussed at this meeting. Status as of October meeting: Data collection underway. Not discussed at this meeting. This is not time sensitive. We agreed to wait until the completion of A24 in March before developing a Study Plan. The US Corps of Engineers funded Little Baker Project to be a tie to this Study. Not discussed. Request pending; not for 2001. Not discussed at this meeting. Status as of October meeting: Merged into A-01.A habitat surveys conducted Aug & Sept 2001. Not discussed at this meeting. Status as of  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 2-14-02_Final_fishWG_notes; Lyn Wiltse  5 of 8   A20 Large Woody Debris Management A21 Skagit Wild & Scenic River Values A22 Baker Lake Trout Impacts Evaluation A23 Baker River Wild & Scenic River Values A24 Hydrologic and Geomorphic Analysis A25 Unnatural Predation A26 Reservoir Limnology-Production Potential Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 2-14-02_Final_fishWG_notes; Lyn Wiltse  October meeting: PSE is talking to a University of Washington researcher to review existing data. Sue received comments on the Study Request from the Forest Service Consulting Team. She will respond and copy her responses to the group. The goal of this plan is to create a Large Woody Debris management plan. There are questions re:; ownership of wood. It may or may not be a salvage issue. R2 has drafted an outline for how we might address the wood issue and move forward with a Study Plan. In the next week, the woody debris (most is less than one foot in diameter) will be removed from the Lower Baker forebay. It will be dragged over to the boat launch where it will de-water. Some members believe that the amounts of gravel and large woody debris are important natural processes and need to be quantified. We need to determine the influence of the project on large woody debris and what to do about it. Sue will flesh out a budget and proposed scope for quantifying large woody debris and button up with Cary. Not discussed at this meeting. Status as of October meeting: Study Request is under review. No longer necessary due to change in management direction re: stocking of Baker Lake. Not discussed at this meeting. Status as of October meeting: Study Request needs clarification. In process of conducting the study, R2 has received hydrologic data from Bob Barnes. Are responding to comments from the Forest Service. We'll be basing analysis of the Skagit River on existing information. Still awaiting a collection permit. This is TIME SENSITIVE for this spring! We agreed to discuss Study Plan offline. Stan is rewriting this to include other species. We don't want to miss this year's plankton bloom. Stan will send this out for review by 6 of 8   A27 Middle Skagit Incubation Flows A28 Fish Passage-Reservoir Management A29 Estimate Sockeye Production from Different Incubation Sources R-A30 Fish Passage-Near Field Smolt Behavior R-A31 Fish Passage-Far Field Smolt Migration R-A32 Fish Passage-Kelt Radio telemetry R-A33 Fish Passage-PIT Tag Migration R-A34 Fish Passage-Downstream Run-Timing Correlation R-A35 Fish Passage-Upstream Run-Timing R-A36 Native & Wild Inland Fish Population Assessments  month end. Pending review, we will move this forward to study design, combining it with similar studies. Not discussed at this meeting. Status as of October meeting: Covered in A9. This is being further developed in the Fish Passage Technical Working Group. Methods are still being evaluated. This is time critical. We will collect the fry from identified sites. We agreed to discuss Study Plan offline. Coordinated through Fish Passage Tech. Group. Coordinated through Fish Passage Tech. Group Coordinated through Fish Passage Tech. Group Coordinated through Fish Passage Tech. Group Coordinated through Fish Passage Tech. Group Coordinated through Fish Passage Tech. Group Mark (WDFW) walked us through this new Study Request. All were asked to get comments to Arnie by end of February so he can forward them to Mark. He will incorporate comments and we can discuss at our March meeting.  LIST OF MEETING HANDOUTS <b7> Agenda, January meeting notes, updated mail list, updated index of study requests, A13.A- Water Quality (02/02 amendment)-Water Quality impacts of human uses of the reservoir and adjacent shorelines,A36- Native and Wild Inland Trout Population Assessments. <b7> A06-Final Report-Assessing Effectiveness of Turbine Intake Baffle Modifications for Improving Downstream Passage of Juvenile Salmon: 2001 Study Results. <b7> Biological Assessment Supplement <ad> Upper Baker Reservoir Flood Control Agreement with Puget Sound Energy (July 30, 2001) <b7> Memo February 12, 2002, To: Members of Baker Working Groups and Solution Team From: Connie Freeland, Licensing Program Manager, Subject: Decision to draft Scoping Document 1. <b7> Downstream Studies and Draft Schedule and Release Groups for 2002 Down Stream Fish Passage Studies <b7> Summary of Release Groups for 2002 Downstream Fish Passage Studies through Baker Lake, Washington. PARKING LOT <b7> State agency presentations re: mandates (agency direction) <b7> Create a master list of possible studies across all working groups and share with all  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 2-14-02_Final_fishWG_notes; Lyn Wiltse  7 of 8   <b7> Access to the Baker River Project hourly operational model (Charles Howard) <b7> Participate in Lower Skagit Work Group for native char <b7> Create Overall "Study Plan" for Studies that will drive the Relicensing Process <b7> Address Traps & Haul <ad> other species EVALUATION OF MEETING Well-Dones <b7> Great food! <b7> Good participation <b7> Emily's presentation <b7> Welcome to Mark K. and Mark D. and Emily! <b7> Talking about hard stuff (prioritizing) <b7> Facilitation Opportunities to Improve <b7> Ran over time <b7> Missed NMFS and USFW <b7> Sending material out late <b7> Discussion off topic <b7> Missed Don and Cary in the p.m. <b7> Room got warm <b7> Late Study Request <b7> Workload piling up <ad>limited resources. Tentative Agenda for Next Meeting March 14, 2002 8:30 p.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. U. S. Forest Service Office Mountlake Terrace, WA 1. Review Agenda and Minutes 2. Review Study Plans and Requests A9a, A9d; A14, A26; A29 3. Review Strawman prioritization matrix and schedule prepared by Sue (R2) 4. Action Items 5. Update from Solution Team Meeting 6. Reports from Fish Passage Technical Working Group 7. IPP Review 8. Additional Issues? 9. Set agenda for April 11, 2002 10. Evaluate Meeting  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 2-14-02_Final_fishWG_notes; Lyn Wiltse  8 of 8    2002aquatic20020214.pdf en 