 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group Meeting September 19, 2002 (8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m.) (Bring Sack Lunch) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) AGENDA Review notes/revise agenda/action items PME Matrix Development • Steve Hocking (FERC) on conference call from 9am until 11am. Solution Team Update • Questions for Steve Hocking? Report on Studies: • Status of existing studies: T2, T4, T5, T7, T11, T13, T15, T17 • New study plans: T6 Noxious Weeds, T7b Future Vegetation • Existing/New Requests – T9 Recreation Use, T10 Goat Habitat Use, T12 Grizzly Bear, T19 HEP, T20 DD Zone Wildlife Use, T21 Elk Habitat, T22 Fluctuation Zone Enhancement Review/Amend Norms and Parking Lot New Study Requests (?), New Teamlet meetings (?) Set agenda/location for October 24th, November 21st meeting location Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group September 19, 2002 8:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. US Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) FINAL MEETING MINUTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations, addressing terrestrial and wildlife resource interests for the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement that: 1. accurately defines and describes the existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; 2. identifies project effects (existing and proposed) leading to development of protection, mitigation, and enhancement options.” Team Leader: Tony Fuchs, (Phone) 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com ATTENDEES: Stan Walsh (Skagit Systems Cooperative), Laurel Shiner (Whatcom Co. Noxious Weed Control Board), Bob Nelson, (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation), Gene Stagner (U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service), Tony Fuchs and Cary Feldmann (Puget Sound Energy), Steve Hocking (FERC) by phone, Joetta Zablotney (R2 consultants, Inc.), Lauri Vigue (Washington Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Ann Risvold (USFS), Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific Environmental Sciences, Inc.), Tom Hamer (Hamer Environmental), Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse (PDSA Consulting, facilitator). SCHEDULE FOR FUTURE WORKING GROUP MEETINGS: Oct. 24 and Nov. 21 and Dec. 19 from 8:30 to 2:00 at the USFS Building, Mountlake Terrace. September 24: HEP Teamlet will meet from 9:00 to 11:00 Elk Teamlet will meet from 11:00 to 1:00 (bring your own lunch). October 10 8:30-2:00 (or 3) Mountlake Terrace to continue walking through the PME matrix Special Meetings for development of PMEs – Oct. 10 in Mountlake Terrace, and Nov. 8 and Dec. 5 in Lacey (Sawyer Hall) Special Invitation: October 9th Economics WG at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon: HYDROPs demo. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 1 of 5 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Mountlake Terrace, WA September 19, 2002, 8:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. 1. Review notes/revise agenda/action items 2. PME Matrix development • Steve Hocking (FERC) on conference call from 9am until 11am 3. Solution Team Update • Questions for Steve Hocking? 3. Report on Studies: • Status of existing studies: T2, T4, T5, T7. T11, T13. T15, T17 • New Study Plans: T6 Noxious Weeds, T7b Future Vegetation • Existing New Requests – T9 Recreation Use, T10 Goat Habitat Use, T12 Grizzly Bear, T19 HEP, T20 DD Zone Wildlife Use, T21 Elk Habitat, T22 Fluctuation Zone Enhancement 4. Review/Amend Norms and Parking Lot 5. New Study Requests (?), New Teamlet meetings (?) 6. Set agenda/location for October 24th, November 21st meeting location. 7. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Give Tom Hamer feedback re: T7, T13 and T4 (Analysis species list) by Oct. 3. • ALL: Go through (updated) matrix and score it. Note those you have concerns with. • Tony: Follow-up with Bob re: NPS wetland maps. • Lauri: Send Project ortho photos to Tony. Verify townships with Tony. • Tom: Ask Lia to talk with Marty re: updating Analysis Species rationale. • Dee: Send out revised (updated) matrix by Oct. 3. • Ann: Check with Don about attending Special PME meetings in the next three months. See also if he can participate in the Basin Vegetation Map teamlet ( T15) • Gene: Send driving directions and room location for Sawyer Hall meeting in Lacey for PME session. • Tom: Change T5 spreadsheet to include new column for certainty of hydrologic connection. • Tony/Lauri: Work with Frank re: MOU for PHS information on listed species. • Tony: Set up Basin Vegetation Map teamlet (T15) with Don, Marty, Joetta, Ron and maybe Lauri after September 24. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Reviewed T-20 (Wildlife use in drawdown zone). Approved to study plan development stage. • Tony: Sent vegetation mapping pdf files (CDs as requested) to all members and posted on FTP site. • ALL: Reviewed vegetation mapping pdf’s and give feedback to Tony/Marty by September 6 re: areas you feel need to be ground/photo truthed. • Dee: Updated PME Matrix and sent out by 8/23. • ALL: Sent additional comments re: matrix to Dee by September 3rd. • Dee: Sent edited version of matrix out to all members including the larger distribution list by 9/5, asked for additional suggestions. • ALL: Sent T6 (Noxious weeds) comments to Tony. • ALL: Reviewed “final” Analysis Species list for completeness (think of process?) – Added Harlequin duck to the list (riparian species). BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 2 of 5 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Marty: Finished Lake Shannon aspect of historic vegetation map. • Tom: Got revised study plan of T6 to review at September meeting • Dee: Sent out updated draft matrix to the larger Working Group distribution list asking if they have other suggestions. • Tony: Sent out Word Document version of Contact Log Form to Working Group members. • Tony: Asked Chris to summarize the 2001 field data relevant to R9,10 (Mt. goat studies) to share with Working Group members. Gave handout to team members. • Tony: Engaged Ron Tressler (EDAW) to flesh out elk study. Ron has reviewed the study request and sent his Statement of Qualifications to Tony to share with team members. He will want to meet with the elk teamlet on Sept. 24 to put together a proposal for going forward with the study. PME MATRIX UPDATE Dee distributed copies of the updated matrix of potential options for PMEs. We then began walking through the list and noting which options should fall out due to legal or technical feasibility reasons. We also noted any options that did not pertain to PME needs and those that violated interests represented at the table and where there was strong support. We also agreed to accept the assumptions set by the Aquatics Working Group as a basis for our discussion with one exception. There was some resistance to honoring the assumption around flood control. We finally agreed to accept the list of assumptions by re- wording number 2 as shown below: BASELINE ASSUMPTIONS: 1. Project remains in place. 2. Flood control will be required. 3. Legal requirements have to be addressed. Dee will integrate these edits into the matrix and send it out for our review by October 3. We will meet again (the entire working group) in Mountlake Terrace on October 10th to finish reviewing this list. By Oct. 8, members will send their list of PMEs with which they have concerns to Tony (along with their Top 5 in terms of priority of interest). We also tentatively set Nov. 8 and Dec. 5 as separate meeting dates (to be held in Lacey at Sawyer Hall) to work specifically on PME development. SOLUTION TEAM UPDATE The Solution Team has delayed their October meeting to October 30 to give Working Groups as much time as possible to come up with their draft PMEs. Steve Hocking will be this Working Group’s representative from FERC since he is a terrestrial biologist. He may attend our October 24 meeting (low probability). He will also attend an ESA meeting on the 29th and a meeting to discuss 401 Water Quality Certification and Coastal Zone Management Act on the 31st. TEAMLET REPORTS / REPORTS ON EXISTING STUDIES Study Title Notes/Next Steps # T2 Vegetation Mapping in Project The drawdown database has been completed and drawdown Area cover type classifications will be finalized this week. Erin Colclazier has returned and will be completing the BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 3 of 5 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Vegetation Mapping project starting Monday. She will be working on the missing information for the cover typing, correction of any errors of the maps and completing the draft final report. T4 Analysis Species Assessment Two species have been sent out for review. We will be sending out each species as they are completed. There are no bird accounts for the Peregrine falcon and the Golden Eagle. Therefore, Tom suggests we do a complete literature search for Golden eagle. For Peregrine falcon, Tom suggests we use the WDFW Status Review to use as the background information for biology and habitat. All were asked to review analysis species list for completeness and content then give Tom feedback as soon as possible. We added Harlequin duck to the list under riparian habitat. The group liked the format and level of detail provided for the Loon. Hamer will use this as a template for other species. This will be out by the end of September. T5 Wetland Inventory Study We agreed to add a field for surveyors to indicate degree of certainty re: hydrologic connection, in the spreadsheets. T6 Noxious Weed Assessment and We reviewed the draft study plan and made some revisions Control Plan around the general intent and the interpretation stage of the study. We decided to survey the perimeter above the full pool mark specifically for knot weed by boat, noting other obnoxious weeds when found. We will include Maple Grove campground. Incorporating these and other edits, the Study Plan was approved. Tom will send out the revised draft by the end of September. T7 Historic Vegetation of the UB Marty walked us through the Historic Vegetation Maps for and LB Projects Shannon and Baker that he and Joetta constructed from GLO notes (1880 and 1892), topographical maps (1915), and aerial photos (1956, 1959). He explained the assumptions they made in creating the various layers of these maps. He also distributed a preliminary study report for this study. The full report, along with the 8 ½ x 11 copies of the maps will be sent out for review on October 11. These maps will include a single red line to indicate full pool for both Baker and Shannon. These maps will form the base for future site potential. The maps will also be available digitally by request. T7b Future vegetation mapping Marty revised the level of detail around the Project decommissioning scenario. We will have R2 develop a list of possible variables. We would review this list as a teamlet and go from there. Stan reminded us that the Solution Team teamlet that put the Process Document together promised Ed BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 4 of 5 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 that the decommissioning scenarios would be kept to a relative high level (to keep scope and costs of study down). This study plan was approved. We need to remember that we will be taking a qualitative look at the data. Marty will get decommissioning scenarios to members for review by the end of October. T-9,10 Recreation use, effects on Mt. We have high country use information from the visitor Goat Habitat use surveys conducted by the Recreation Working Group during the summer of 2001. It includes an estimate of the Baker Lake overnight users that also visit the high country. We will discuss the next steps (mountain goat-related PME?) at our next meeting. T11 Oregon Spotted Frog Inventory The final report has been completed and sent out for review. Give Tom any feedback by October 4, especially re: potential information gaps on the report. Tom will produce a red line/strikeout version. At our October meeting Tom will note any areas of concern we need to discuss. R-T12 Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging On hold depending on T15 and working group needs. Don Habitat Value was to have a write-up outlining the study need for our review by September 3rd, and we were to discuss at our September 19 meeting. This has been deferred for discussion at the October 24th meeting. T13 Survey and Manage Terrestrial Draft Final report has been completed and sent out for Mollusk Survey review. T15 Basin Vegetation Mapping Some wetlands, riparian zones, and seral stage areas are not included on this map. We look forward to input from Don. We might modify the map to incorporate elk foraging habitat. There may also be HEP implications. We agreed to have another teamlet (floret) meeting to review our list of studies (which has evolved considerably since we began putting this map together) and determine how to proceed re: Phase 2 of the Study Plan. T16 Project Area Rare Plant Survey The rare plant database is completed and the draft final report is currently being edited and will be completed by the end of September. Hamer will get preliminary report to Ann for initial review by September 23. T17 Amphib. Studies in Reservoir The amphibian draft report is almost completed. Joetta Fluctuation Zone Zablotney is working on the maps for the report and will have them to Hamer Environmental in the next week. Hamer will then add the additional information needed into the report. Hope to have preliminary study reports out for our review by end of September. We hope to have the preliminary study report out for review by the end of September. R-T18 Breeding Bird Surveys On hold. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 5 of 5 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 R-T19 Habitat Evaluation Studies Teamlet meeting on September 24th. R-T20 Wildlife Use in the Reservoir We discussed the possibility of expanding the study and Drawdown Zone getting information on use vs. availability of cover types in drawdown zone and potential Project effects. This could guide our mitigation/enhancement efforts, especially around analysis species. We decided to go ahead (approve) with the revised study request as it was written (limited scope), and have Tony develop the study plan. RT21 Elk studies A teamlet met to discuss this. Tony distributed a revised Study Request for our review. We agreed to approve this request and move it forward to Study Plan development. Tony will ask Ron Tressler to flesh out the Study Plan. The Elk Teamlet will meet with Ron on September 24th to work on next steps. T22 Fluctuation Zone Enhancement Gene distributed a study request for our review. This could include a phased approach, possibly evolving into a PME or a management plan. Concern was expressed about introducing any non-native species. Monitoring would have to be rigorous. We approved this request to go forward as a study plan. Gene, Marty and Tony will flesh out the study plan to describe the initial phase. NEW STUDY REQUESTS None at this meeting. REVIEW/AMEND NORMS AND PARKING LOT Lyn distributed an updated version of the norms. The new norm of “ Be kind and respectful when speaking with each other.” We will continue to review the norms periodically to be sure they meet the needs of the group. HANDOUTS • Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Groups Meeting Norms (Updated September 18, 2002) • Study Request Index and Study Index, Baker River Project, FERC No. 2150 • Suggested Ground Rules for Discussing Draft PME Options (Agreement Dynamics) • Preliminary Study Report, Historic Vegetation of the Upper and Lower Baker Projects, Baker River Project Relicense Study T7 • Baker Project Terrestrial Working Group: Draft PME options Evaluation – First Draft- September, 2002 • High Country Recreation Use report from the Recreation Working Group • PSE Baker River Relicense Project Update for September 19, 2002 (Terrestrial Studies) PARKING LOT • Conceptual Mitigation Approach (P/M/Es) • Review time frame/goals of working groups/milestones BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 6 of 5 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Definitions of “project boundary”, “project effects”, “previous environment”, “project area”, NEPA definitions • Watershed Analysis Presentation • Land Management – Do study? • Make list of all available relevant data. Create a subset of those data for Tony to always bring to meetings for group to continually reference. • Are transmission lines in or out of FERC boundary? • Changing Climate Patterns • Determine land management allocations within Project boundary MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones • Loon joke • We covered a lot • We had more common ground • Marty did a mini Arnie thing with the food- it was great! Opportunities to Improve • Ran over • Went WARP speed at end (instead of possibly deferring some things) • Missed Don, Patrick and Bob • No time to bring up our old arguments! What’s Hot? • Doubling up on meetings (lots of work!) • Collaboration is going very well TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR OUR OCTOBER 24TH MEETING Mountlake Terrace, Washington 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. • Bring a sack lunch and we’ll work through! 1. Review notes/agenda/action items 2. PME Matrix development 3. Solution Team Update 4. Studies: T4, T12, T13, Review reports and T20, HEP update? 5. New study plans for review 6. New Requests? 7. Set agenda and location for November 21st meeting 8. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2002 MEETING NOTES Page 7 of 5 Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  