 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group December 16, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 21905 64th Ave. West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 AGENDA 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. PMEs (teamlet report, et cetera) • Review drafts and assign leads for each 4. Studies: • R5: Aesthetics • R11/15: Teamlet report: Trail Routing • R16 Visioning Study Draft (Revised?) 5. Set agenda / location for Jan, Feb,Mar. meetings 6. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group December 16, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace WA 98273 FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 853- 8341. PRESENT Chris Lawson and Alex Cohen (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Lauri Vigue by phone (WDFW), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Brian Adams (Skagit County Parks), Saul Weisberg (North Cascades Institute), Cary Feldmann and Andy Hatfield (PSE), Bruce Freet (Environmental Agreements) and Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and Mary Jean Bullock, notetaker (PDSA Consulting, Inc.). 2003 SCHEDULE Jan. 27, Feb. 24, Mar.24, Apr.28, May 19 (third Monday), Jun 23, Jul 28, Aug. 25, Sept.22. Oct 27, Nov.17 (third Monday), December 15 (third Monday). Assume Forest Service Office in Mountlake Terrace unless otherwise specified. PME Teamlet: Jan 15 at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon, from 9:00 to 3:00 CONFERENCE CALL LINE: ALL WERE REMINDED, ESPECIALLY DURING THESE WINTER MONTHS, THAT THE CONFERENCE CALL LINE WILL BE OPEN DURING ALL THESE MEETINGS. PLEASE CALL 1-866-280-6429 AND ENTER PARTICIPANT CODE: 144995 #. Baker River Project Relicense December 16, 2002 Page 1 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group All meetings are from 9:00 to 2:30 unless otherwise specified. December 16, 2002 Agenda – USFS Office/Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. PMES (teamlet report, etc.) • Review drafts and assign leads for each (Jim-Trails) 4. Studies: R11/15: Teamlet report: Trail Routing R16: Visioning Study Draft (revised?) 5. Set agenda/location for Jan, Feb, Mar. meetings 6. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Review Aesthetics Study plan and be ready with comments by the Jan 23 meeting. • Andy: Send out updated ownership maps before next meeting. This is still in process of being revised. • Ann: Get Chris map layer of USFS landslide analysis (historic and unstable soils layer on SRI). • Andy: Check with Sheryl re: DNR road access. • Andy: Sent out Marty’s PME drafts (Terrestrial Working Group) along with his initial draft for Recreation PMEs for our review (as examples). • Chris: Get together with Crown Pacific, Glacier and DNR to discuss access/objectives to include on roads layer of GIS map. • Ann and Andy: Discuss how to revise PME 240 and 230.1. • Saul and Bruce: Merge versions of 235 and send to Andy so he can distribute by Jan. 8. • Andy: Send out drafts for all PMEs for working group review by Jan. 8 in prep for Jan. 15 PME teamlet meeting. • Chris/Tony: Continue to evaluate land-use information (February timeframe). We have already collected everything that we need to satisfy FERC requirements. • Chris: Get list from R-2 of all the layers they have information for. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Got Chris specific names/locations of attraction sites (other than developed/dispersed recreation sites) to include on the base map by November 27 (for R11/R15). • Lauri: Asked the Terrestrial Working Group to define the level of constraints (High, Medium, Low) within each of the vegetation layers identified in their Basin Vegetation Cover-type Map, and get back to Chris. • Chris: Clarified WDFW property ownership. He found that the State owns Vogler Lake access through an easement. • Ann: Got Chris locations of known user-made trails by November 27. • Chris: Checked access/objectives State and private lands. Chris reported that he knows this information already for IP and he will be getting together soon with Crown Pacific, Glacier and DNR to discuss. Baker River Project Relicense November 18, 2002 Page 2 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group • Ann: From the FS lands status book it appears that from 1960 the FS determined that it manages and controls use on the surface waters of Baker Lake except for areas belonging to PSE and where they are under the terms of the original license. • Lyn: Reserved fourth Monday of each month in 2003 at conference room at USFS Office in Mountlake Terrace. STUDIES R5: VISUALS AND AESTHETICS STUDY Andy reported that photo taking is currently hampered by fog. We’ll see what he can come up with over the next month. He looked for transmission line viewpoints. The only one he found was from the top of the dam, downstream over the tailrace. All were asked to give feedback to Chris on the Study Plan by our January 27 meeting. R11: RECREATION CAPACITY AND SUITABILITY ANALYSIS AND R15: RECREATIONAL TRAIL ROUTING We discussed layers and constraint scaling at our last meeting. We have scheduled a teamlet meeting to complete this discussion on January 7, where we hope to complete the constraint scaling. R-2 will then complete the associated composite map, maybe by our January 27 meeting. Lauri reported that the Terrestrial Working Group suggested consulting the Northwest Forest Plan for guidance on buffer widths (I5O – 300 ft.) They have some wetland information (they have completed amphibian and spotted frog surveys). They will have additional information by the summer 2003. We will continuing discussing this at the January 7 teamlet meeting at R-2. Chris and Andy meet with IP Forestry on November 26. We told them we would keep them informed of any proposed recreation PMEs that affect their property. IP will be open to discussion of any proposals for trail routing or recreational development on their property. They have harvested the southern portion of the property and are planning to do some harvesting on the northern portion. This would include re- planting. R-16: NEEDS ANALYSIS A teamlet met December 10 to review the data re: special places and attributes from the Visioning Exercise, November 6 at the Cotton Tree Inn. Ann reported that she is working with Kathy Ludlow and others to begin consolidate areas of similar values and attributes and writing descriptive statements for them. As we review the maps of current use and the associated attributes (e.g., boating, views, feeling of seclusion), we will consider conflicts that currently exist and those that may arise over the term of the license. We also need to keep in mind changes in use associated with the seasons. Currently, times of high use are Memorial Day, 4th of July and then the end of July through Labor Day (weather permitting). We will also consolidate the future in aspects of the exercise (e.g., future needs and changes to be made.) Ann and Andy will meet December 16 to continue this analysis. They are drafting a summary document for the participants of the Visionary Exercise. They hope to have it complete for our review at our January 27 meeting. We will include a summary of that report in our needs analysis. At that point we will identify Next Steps for the Needs Analysis (data gaps). Baker River Project Relicense November 18, 2002 Page 3 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group PME WORKSHOP Lyn shared with the group a handout that Bruce and Dee shared with the Cultural and Aquatics Working Groups re: the aim and potential participant list for the Cross Resource Workshop. SUGGESTIONS FOR THE MARCH WORKSHOP • Agreed with the suggestion by the Aquatics WG that workshop participants arrive Tuesday night, March 4 so they would be ready to start bright an dearly March 5, and work all day (as needed) March 6 as well. This would eliminate the need to meet on Friday, March 7. • We will need to develop a pre-workshop packet outlining all known areas of conflict across resource areas as well as opportunities to synergize. This packet should include workshop ground rules (e.g., what happens if we can’t come to resolution, etc.). • Concern was expressed about the limitation of sleeping accommodations at the Lodge, especially if the workshop participants are over 30 (and it looks like they will be). It was suggested that we meet at the Cotton Tree Inn instead. • If possible, it would be nice to stage discussions so resource “experts” could come and go (this may not be possible since there is so much overlap among the resource areas, and that a sense of continuity among participants is also desired). • We need to keep in mind opportunities to synergize as well as conflicts. RE: THE DRAFT PARTICIPANT LIST • Seems a little facilitator light (Bruce, Dee and Lyn) • Saul indicated a desire to attend the workshop to represent educational interests across all resource areas. The Recreation WG endorsed this idea (as the Aquatics WG did with Ruth Mathews of the Nature Conservancy attending to represent NGO interests for fish). • Brian suggested that Dave Brookings be the Skagit County representative. • The list seems PSE/agency heavy, with 2 PSE reps attending from each working group in addition to the agency folks listed on the table. Might we open it up to more non-PSE participants (environmental folks such as Ken Wilcox)? PME DISCUSSION Saul reported that he has drafted an initial PME related to environmental education. He will work with Bruce to integrate it with the draft that Bruce has been preparing. Andy distributed the first draft of PM&E 240, Construct, Operate and Maintain Developed Recreation Facilities, that he developed (with input from Bruce and Chris). As we discussed the rather lengthy draft, Ann (Forest Service) felt the it was inappropriate to include supposed results from studies that the working group has not yet seen drafts of or reviewed and approved the final reports for (such as the visitor survey, capacity and suitability study and the needs analysis). The PME also includes “conclusions” based on the same supposed study results that are premature for the same reason. The draft PME should reflect “x’s “ where information is undocumented and where items for negotiation have not been settled as a WG. Chris (Huckell / Weinman Associates) responded that none of the information in the draft PM&E description was represented as a conclusion. Ann was, also, concerned that the draft does not reflect a collaborative spirit on PSE’s part and does not set us up well for future PME’s. Saul (NCI) agreed and said that there were also places where the language seemed positional and heavy on the PSE Baker River Project Relicense November 18, 2002 Page 4 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group perspective (e.g., Panorama Point). (Team Leader note: At the November 18th working group meeting all working group members were encouraged to participate in collaborative development of the PM&E descriptions but there were no volunteers and the group directed PSE to prepare this material.) Next Steps: Ann and Andy will discuss how to revise the initial draft of this PME in response to feedback received from WG participants. Andy will also come up with an initial draft of the other six PMEs (not counting the educational PME that Saul will be discussing with Bruce. In these drafts he will defer discussion of advantages, disadvantages, unresolved conflicts, and justifications to a high level, and keep them to a bulleted form. He will distribute these drafts (including the educational PME from Bruce and Saul) by January 8 for all to review prior to the PME teamlet meeting at the PSE office in Mt. Vernon from 9:00 to 3:00 on January 15. HANDOUTS (Handouts to be posted on the web will be bolded) • Outline of Proposed PME Workshop objectives and draft participant list • Draft Matrix of Recreation Working Group PMEs (Description, Proposed Action, Related Studies, etc.) PARKING LOT - Presentation of National Forest Plan - Land management - Forest Service presentation of SMS - Hold periodic “outreach” meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) - Field trip- summer 2003? - Review USFS Roads Analysis Report- 2003? - Tie education piece to ALL Working Groups EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well • Got out early • Working through how to finish PMEs • Nice to have Lauri participate by phone • Great feedback re: PME Workshop in March • Andy did a good job of drafting the initial PME- Thanks Andy! Need for Improvement • Missed Jim and Susan What’s Hot? • PMEs • Studies Studies Status • Aesthetics: Hope to have study plan approved at January meeting Baker River Project Relicense November 18, 2002 Page 5 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group • Visioning: Writing up report from Nov. 6 exercise for public participants. Then will look at examining under-served/unmet needs • Capacity/suitability Analysis: Working on GIS map layers • Coordinating with Terrestrial Working Group re: appropriate buffers for trails, wetlands, etc. TENTATIVE AGENDA January 27, 2003 Agenda – USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. NOTE: BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. PMES (Jan. 15 Teamlet report, etc.) 4. Studies: R5: Aesthetics- Review comments on study plan R11/15: Jan. 7 Teamlet report R16: Visioning Study Draft- Review draft of report from Nov. 6 exercise and begin to identify underserved/unmet needs. 5. Other? 6. Set agenda/location for Feb. meeting 7. Evaluate meeting Baker River Project Relicense November 18, 2002 Page 6 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  