BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group January 8, 2002 12:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. US Forest Service Bldg.- Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest 10 State Route 20 Sedro-Woolley, WA Bring a Sack Lunch <ad> PSE Will Provide Snacks and Drinks AGENDA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items 4. Finalize APE 5. Discuss Methods for Testing and evaluating sites (Section V of Research Design) 6.Set agenda and location for February 12 meeting. 7. Evaluate Meeting   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Working Group January 8, 2002 12:00 p.m. <ad> 4:00 p.m. U.S. Forest Service Bldg. - Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest 810 State Route 20 Sedro-Woolley, WA 98284  MEETING NOTES  Mission: "To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process." Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com PRESENT: Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Tony Fuchs (Puget Sound Energy), Kristen Schuldt (Puget Sound Energy), Janis Bouma (USFS- Mt. BakerSnoqualmie-Olympic National Forests), Bob Mierendorf (National Park Service), Gary Wessen (Wessen & Associates), Alex Maass (HRA), Gail Thompson (HRA), Rob Whitlam - by phone - (Office of Archaeology & Historic Preservation) The meeting started at 12:30 and ended at 4:14 p.m. FUTURE MEETING DATES February 12, 2002, March 12, April 9, 2002 All regular attendees are reminded of the importance of letting Jessie know if they are unable to attend a meeting. Jessie will also put a meeting cancellation notice on her office voice mail (425-462-3609) due to any sudden bad winter weather. INTRODUCTIONS This group welcomed Tony Fuchs, PSE's terrestrial biologist who is Team Leader for the Terrestrial Resources Working Group and PSE's representative on the Recreation and Aesthetics Working Group. Tony is visiting to see what the Cultural Working Group is working on.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 01/08/02 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   HANDOUTS <b7> 2001 Licensing Accomplishments <b7> Area of Potential Effects (APE) for Archaeological Resources <ad> Working Definition 11-19-01 <b7> Maps of Area of Potential Effects (PDF files sent via Email 1-7-01) NOTE: Recalled 1-14-01 <b7> Draft Unanticipated Discovery Plan (UDP) 12-18-01 <b7> Relicensing Timeline Assumptions  NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Review Section V of Research Design for February meeting. <b7> ALL: Get comments to Jessie on Draft APE Working Definition by Friday February 1. <b7> Larry: Run Unanticipated Discovery Plan (draft) by Tribal Councils for feedback. <b7> Jessie: Send out Cultural Resources Training outline and contact tribal members to see if they can participate in the archeological piece of the training. <b7> Jessie: Prepare letter to Larry Nelson re: Cultural Training. <b7> Jessie: Contact Charles re: local law enforcement attendance at archaeological training. <b7> Janis: Check Forest Service office availability for February 12 meetings Mountlake Terrace/SedroWoolley. <b7> PSE: Clarify situation with Scott Schuyler and attorneys and discuss ramifications of confidentiality concerns and report back to Cultural Working Group. <b7> Janis: Talk with Jan Hollenbeck to clarify her concerns with project development and maintenance activities on Forest Service land. <b7> ALL: Review latest draft of Unanticipated Discovery Plan and send comments to Jessie by Friday February 1st.  January 8, 2002, from 12:00 to 4:00 p.m. at US Forest Service Bldg. In Sedro-Woolley, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items 4. UDP 5. "Finalize" APE 6. Discuss Methods for testing and evaluating sites (Section V of Research Design) 7. Set agenda for February 12th meeting 8. Evaluate meeting  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Gary: Contacted Larry Nelson re: Cultural Training. <b7> Connie: Talked to Team Leaders re: year end list of accomplishments/matrix to track issues/alternative responses that overlap across Working Groups. <b7> Jessie: Sent updated list of 2001 accomplishments to members to review. <b7> Alex: Worked with R-2 to draw the APE based on our set of rules prior to our next meeting. <b7> Janis: Checked Forest Service office availability for January 8, February 12 meetings Mountlake Terrace/Sedro-Woolley? <b7> Alex: Had PDF file of map with APE sent electronically to members prior to January 8.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 01/08/02 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   GIS COVERAGE MAPS <b7> Tony explained GIS coverages that are available. We'll be able to turn data layers on and off. <b7> These are draft maps, which will incorporate other elements (such as recreation sites). <b7> Tony noted the Recreation Working Group has recorded over 200 dispersed recreation sites. Most are above high water mark. The group has GPS locations for them. Most are within <bc> mile of the shoreline. <b7> Recreation Working Group identified a zone to look for dispersed sites in, but did not make a determination if sites are project induced. <b7> Bob noted that project induced use of a site is different than a project induced site. <b7> Janis noted that we need to note which recreation sites may affect heritage sites in the area. <b7> Criteria have not been established for deciding which recreation sites are project induced. <b7> Terrestrial Working Group is possibly going to examine a subset of dispersed recreation sites and wetland areas to examine project effects on rare plants. <b7> Cultural Working Group needs to see raw data on locations of dispersed recreation sites. CONFIDENTIALITY ISSUES <b7> Jessie read letter from Scott Schuyler, requesting on behalf of the Upper Skagit Tribe that the Cultural Working Group postpone meetings until the confidentiality issue is resolved and the Communications Protocol & Process Document are finalized. <b7> Connie gave status on confidentiality issue in Communications Protocol and Process Document. <b7> PSE needs to report back to Cultural Working Group regarding discussions with Upper Skagit and see if there is consensus for continuing meetings. UDP -INTERIM PROTECTION <b7> Jessie reported that Jan Hollenbeck called and noted that project development and maintenance on Forest Service lands triggers Section 106 and this is not covered in the UDP. Jessie responded that other interim measures, not the UDP, would cover this. Most of these measures will be in the Cultural Resources Management Plan, but Jan sees need for these measures earlier. Janis will clarify this with Jan. Jessie said the working group has discussed the need for an interim protocol for project development and maintenance activities and intends to address it. The agreement between the Forest Service and PSE dates from the 1950s and does not provide adequate guidance. <b7> Gail and Tony suggested preparing a set of procedures for the transition period in collaboration with PSE operations staff. MEMBER LEAVING Jessie noted that John Boggs has decided to leave the relicensing process. We will stay in touch with him and hopefully he will return to the process in the future. Alex noted that being able to meet with John during the archaeological survey enriched the experience, and John also went out of his way to provide a tour of the museum for some of the crew. Jessie noted he also reviewed every document the working group produced.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 01/08/02 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   DISCUSSION OF AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECTS (APE) <b7> Alex explained the Area of Potential Effects map. Tony clarified property ownership around Baker Lake and Lake Shannon. Much of the property around Lake Shannon above elevation 440 is not owned by PSE. The group discussed procedures for survey on non-PSE land, including asking permission and disclosure that sites would be recorded. <b7> There is still no resolution from FERC regarding whether the T-lines will remain within the project boundary. <b7> Next step is to overlay dispersed campsites and see where the APE needs to be expanded. Tribal input is also needed, including input on visual impact. Tony suggested this issue could be forwarded to the Recreation Working Group as part of their Aesthetics study. <b7> Tribes also may have concerns about survey up the drainages, above creek mouths. Gail noted that we need to clarify whether such survey is triggered by archeological concerns or TCP concerns. <b7> Separate discussion with the Tribes on the APE is needed.  PARKING LOT <b7> "How do we address upland areas?" <b7> Map of general project area, include transmission lines <b7> Upland area--importance of mountain goat <b7> Keys to access Shannon and Baker Lakes and gates up lake <b7> Develop "Area of Potential Effects" Map <b7> Coordinate with Terrestrial and Recreation Working Groups <b7> Glossary of terms: what are "protection," "mitigation," and "enhancement"? <b7> Develop TCP (Traditional Cultural Properties) studies <b7> Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources <b7> Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests <b7> Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations <b7> Cultural for DNR Land <b7> Cultural aspects of Forest and Fish Agreement <b7> Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? <b7> Have tribal presentations on cultural/spiritual significance of resources <b7> Possibility of transplanting young cedar trees <b7> Availability of downed cedar for tribal use  MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones <b7> Connie's facilitation <b7> Tony's participation <b7> Background information on Confidentiality issue. <b7> Group discussion and willingness to talk over issues <b7> Kristen's sheet tearing <b7> No flooding in this part of Sedro-Woolley <b7> Forest Service meeting facility. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 01/08/02 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   Opportunities for Improvement <b7> Need tribal participation AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING February 12, 2002 noon to 4:00 p.m. at PSE Offices in Mt. Vernon, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items 4. Discuss UDP 5. Discuss APE 6. Discuss methods for testing and evaluating sites 7. Set agenda for March 12 meeting 8. Evaluate meeting NOTE: The February meeting is tentatively scheduled <ad> see CONFIDENTIALITY ISSUES above.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 01/08/02 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5    2002cultural20020108.pdf en 