BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group Meeting August 21, 2002 (8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m.) (Bring Sack Lunch) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) AGENDA Review notes/revise agenda/action items Settlement Process Development <b7> Settlement Teamlet Report, BAWG report <b7> Draft Matrix Revisit Studies List <b7> HEP study discussion <b7> Other study requests Report on Existing Studies: <b7> Status of previous studies <b7> New Requests/Plans <ad> T21 Elk Habitat, T6 Noxious Weeds, T7b Future Vegetation <b7> Wetland Field Trip Review/Amend Norms and Parking Lot New Study Requests (?), New Teamlet meetings(?) Set agenda/location for September 19th meeting, October 24th meeting location Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group August 21, 2002 8:30 a.m. <ad> 2:00 p.m. US Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702)  FINAL MEETING MINUTES  Mission: "To develop alternative solutions and recommendations, addressing terrestrial and wildlife resource interests for the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement that: 1. accurately defines and describes the existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; 2. identifies project effects (existing and proposed) leading to development of protection, mitigation, and enhancement options."  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs, (Phone) 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  ATTENDEES: Stan Walsh (Skagit Systems Cooperative), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Gene Stagner (U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service), Tony Fuchs (Puget Sound Energy), Lauri Vigue (Washington Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Ann Risvold (U.S. Forest Service), Don Gay (U.S. Forest Service, Bob Kuntz (National Park Service), Tom Hamer and Lia Kruger (Hamer Environmental), Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse (PDSA Consulting, facilitator).  SCHEDULE FOR FUTURE MEETINGS: September 19 and October 24.  AGENDA Mountlake Terrace, WA August 21, 2002, 8:30 a.m. <ad> 2:00 p.m. 1. Review notes/revise agenda/action items 2. Settlement Process Document 3. Baker agency Working Group <ad> Draft Matrix  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 8/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1 of 5   4. HEP study discussion 5. Revisit Study List 6. Report on Existing Studies <b7> Status of previous studies <b7> Teamlet Reports <b7> New Requests/Plans T21 Elk Habitat, T6 Noxious Weeds, T7b Future Vegetation <b7> Wetland Field Trip 7. Review/Amend Norms and Parking Lot 8. Set agenda/location for September 19th and October 24th meeting location 9. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Review T-20 (Wildlife use in drawdown zone). Be ready to discuss at September 19 meeting. <b7> Tony: Send vegetation mapping pdf files (and CDs as requested) to all members and post on FTP site. <b7> ALL: Review vegetation mapping pdf's and give feedback to Tony/Marty by September 6 re: areas you feel need to be ground/photo truthed. <b7> Dee: Update PMS Matrix and send out by 8/23. <b7> ALL: Send additional comments re: matrix to Dee by September 3rd. <b7> Dee: Send edited version of matrix out to all members including the larger distribution list by 9/5, asking for additional suggestions. <b7> ALL: Send T6 (Noxious weeds) comments to Tony as soon as possible. <b7> ALL: Review "final" Analysis Species list for completeness (think of process?) <b7> Marty: Finish Lake Shannon aspect of historic vegetation map. <b7> Tom: Get revised study plan of T6 to review at September meeting <b7> Dee: Send out updated draft matrix to the larger Working Group distribution list asking if they have other suggestions. <b7> Tony: Send out Word Document version of Contact Log Form to Working Group members. <b7> Tony: Ask Chris to summarize the 2001 field data relevant to R9,10 (Mt. goat studies) to share with Working Group members. <b7> Tony: Follow-up with Bob re: NPS wetland maps. <b7> Lauri: Send Project ortho photos to Tony. <b7> Tony: Engage Ron Tressler (EDAW) to flesh out elk study. OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Marty checked with Lia re: the list of possible mixed forest species she prepared. <b7> For T15, Tony sent out pdf format of wetlands in the basin. <b7> For T7, Joetta is fixing coordinates of river. The product will be a zone-type cover type map with consistent naming conventions as those used for basin vegetation map. SETTLEMENT PROCESS DEVELOPMENT Dee distributed copies of the 15 Terrestrial issues framed as problems to be solved. The Settlement Teamlet began brainstorming possible PMEs that might address these issues. We reviewed this list and clarified some of the existing language. We also added new potential PMEs.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 8/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2 of 5   Dee will integrate these edits into the matrix and send out by August 23rd. All were asked to get additional suggestions to Dee by September 3rd. She will send out the revised matrix by September 5 for all to review (she will include everyone on the broader distribution list for this Working Group). At our September 19th meeting, we will begin to narrow the list of PMEs according to the criteria set by the Solution Team (legal, pertaining to project P/M/Es technically feasible). We will begin discussing how various PMEs do/don't meet various interests.  SOLUTION TEAM Tony distributed the FERC approved versions (dated August 2002) of the Communication Protocol and Process Document. They are bound as they won't be confused with the many previous drafts. He also distributed a Contact Log Form for us to use (according to the Process Document) when we want a conversation entered into the official record. The Solution Team has delayed their October meeting to October 30 to give Working Groups as much time as possible to come up with their draft PMEs. Steve Hocking will be this Working Groups representative since he is a terrestrial biologist. He may attend our October 24 meeting. He might also be available by phone for future meetings.  HEP STUDY DISCUSSION Lauri originally submitted this study request in November 2001. We have discussed it at times, but no action has been taken to date. Methodology was discussed at the last Baker Agency Working Group meeting. We could do a "full blown" HEP, or narrow the approach to look at selected species. This could also be a monitoring tool for us post license to check to see if PMEs are having the desired effect. A teamlet of Lauri, Tom, Don, Tony, Bob, Patrick and Marty will meet to flesh out the approach in a Study Plan (Study Request was approved) September 24 at Mount Lake Terrace at 10:00 a.m.  TEAMLET REPORTS / REPORTS ON EXISTING STUDIES  Study # T2 T4 T5  Title Vegetation Mapping in Project Area Analysis Species Assessment Wetland Inventory Study  Notes/Next Steps This is currently in the quality control phase. Draft final report is due October 4. On August 27, there will be a meeting between ASI and Hamer to resolve discrepancies in boundaries and polygon information. We reviewed and finalized the species for each of our habitats. Lia handed out a draft Species Assessment and asked for feedback on format. She is also interested in any other (basin or species-specific) information we would like to be added. We agreed that our basic literature review for birds would be the bird accounts from The Birds of North America series. PSE will order ten copies of each for Working Group member's reference. We walked through the species list and noted specifics that should be included in Lia's research. The literature reviews will be completed by September 30 (at the latest). The field work has been done on this. We are resolving some  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 8/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3 of 5   T6 T7 T7b T-9,10 T11 R-T12 T13 T15 T16 T17  Noxious Weed Assessment and Control Plan Historic Vegetation of the UB and LB Projects Future vegetation mapping Recreation use, effects on Mt. Goat Habitat use Oregon Spotted Frog Inventory Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging Habitat Value Survey and Manage Terrestrial Mollusk Survey Basin Vegetation Mapping Project Area Rare Plant Survey Amphib. Studies in Reservoir Fluctuation Zone  technical issues/discrepancies next week. The edited Study Plan will be available for review at our September meeting.. For Baker the aerial photo interpretation for vegetation and water has been done. The polygons are being digitized. Joetta is working with AESI to verify the indexes. Marty is working with Joetta on Lake Shannon. Both should be ready for our review prior to our next meeting. Draft Study Plan was sent out August 17. We should get comments to Tony by September 6th. Preliminary feedback was that there was too much detail around decommissioning On hold, pending analysis of Recreation Working Group survey data from 2001 field season. Tony will get summary of relevant data to Working Group members as soon as possible. Draft final report will be ready for review early in the week of August 26. On hold depending on T15 and working group needs. Don will have a write-up outlining the study need for our review by September 3rd. We will discuss at our September 19 meeting. Final report will be ready for review by September 6th for discussion at our September 19th meeting. Wetland inventory aerial photo interpretation was sent to members. It looks like NWI missed lots of wetlands. Tony identified additional wetlands (mostly those with surface water) that he could discern from aerial photos. He also made assumptions about some pasture areas. It is more complete now but still under representing some forested and riverine wetlands. Tony will button up with Bob re: data the National Park Service can share. Next steps are to identify areas that require ground/photo truthing. Tony will send these maps to all now and in the next few days after Joetta completes the seral stage pieces for our review. All will give feedback to Tony and Marty about areas that need ground/photo truthing by September 6. Is way happening! By August 23, field surveys will be complete for all selected wetland and recreation sites. Two S&M moss species and 1 S&M lichen species have been found. Ann R. had a concern about some of the documentation that she has received from Hamer. We discussed and remedied the concern. We hope to complete this survey by end of September UTMs will be verified. Draft final report will be out September 13 for discussion at September 19 Working Group meeting.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 8/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4 of 5   R-T18 R-T19 R-T20 RT21  Breeding Bird Surveys Habitat Evaluation Studies Wildlife Use in the Reservoir Drawdown Zone Elk studies  On hold. Being developed We will discuss this at our September 19 meeting. A teamlet met to discuss this. Tony distributed a revised Study Request for our review. We agreed to approve this to become a Study Plan. Tony will ask Ron Tressler to flesh out the Study Plan. The Elk Teamlet will meet again after Ron has been brought on board to determine next steps.  WETLAND TEAMLET REPORT Next steps: Monitor hydrology of potential P/M/E areas. (These areas need to be identified). Another step might be to assess impacts of the drawdown zone on amphibians through a separate (new) study.  NEW STUDY REQUESTS Gene will be sending out a study request that looks at planting different species of plants in the inundation zone to test if this might be a feasible PME for the new license.  REVIEW/AMEND NORMS AND PARKING LOT Lyn reviewed these with us and reminded us how we can communicate more effectively with each other. For example, replace "ands" with "buts", etc. We will continue to review the norms periodically to be sure they meet the needs of the group. There is a request that we try to be more consistent about meeting dates, for planning purposes. We should meet on the third Thursday of the month as the norm, with a change of date by consensus only if necessary.  HANDOUTS <b7> Summary of Terrestrial Resource Issues (Baker River Project Relicense: Terrestrial PME Options Matrix) <b7> The Official Version of the Alternative Licensing Procedure (ALP) Communications Protocol and Process Document <b7> Sample of Contact Log Form to be used to enter conversations into the official record (as per the Communications Protocol) <b7> Study Request Index, Baker River Project, FERC No. 2150  PARKING LOT <b7> Conceptual Mitigation Approach (P/M/Es) <b7> Review time frame/goals of working groups/milestones <b7> Definitions of "project boundary", "project effects", "previous environment", "project area", NEPA definitions <b7> Watershed Analysis Presentation <b7> Land Management <ad> Do study? <b7> Make list of all available relevant data. Create a subset of those data for Tony to always bring to meetings for group to continually reference. <b7> Are transmission lines in or out of FERC boundary?  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 8/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5 of 5   <b7> Changing Climate Patterns <b7> Determine land management allocations within Project boundary MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones <b7> Food <b7> Got out on time <b7> Covered lots of ground <b7> More Lyn's jokes <b7> Mint Milanos Opportunities to Improve <b7> Lyn's jokes What's Hot? <b7> Study timelines <ad> getting them completed before the draft EA in May TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR OUR SEPTEMBER 19th MEETING Mountlake Terrace, Washington 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. Bring a sack lunch and we'll work through! 1. Review notes/agenda/action items 2. PME Matrix development 3. Solution Team Update 4. Studies: T4, T12, T13, Review reports and T20, HEP update? 5. New Requests? 8. Set agenda and location for October 24th meeting 7. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 8/21/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6 of 5   PSE Baker Lake Relicensing Study Update  8/20/02  Spotted Frog Study - Final report is ready for review by the committee. - Review and email comments to Lia and Tony. - Maps are in process of being developed by Joetta (R2 Consultants)  Mollusk Study - Final report will be completed and ready for review by Sept 6th and will be discussed at the September 19th meeting.  Amphibian Study - Final report is in progress and the draft will be ready for review on Sept 13th and will be discussed at the meeting on September 19th.  Vegetation Mapping Study - Data entry is being completed this week. - Cover typing of the draw down zone will begin the week of the 26th - Erin Colclazier will be returning on the 18th of Sept to complete the final report. The target date for the final report is October 4th. - An update will be given at the September 19th meeting.  Analysis Species - Drafted literature review has been circulated to the committee for format review. - The committee needs to finalize the list of species today in the meeting. - Species Analysis literature reviews will be completed by September 30th.  - In order to complete all 35 species by September 30th in an efficient manner, I propose to use the bird accounts from The Birds of North America. This provides an excellent foundation of information on biology, habitat requirements, effects of habitat alteration and human activity. We would include additional information on habitat alteration, human activity and on any relevant studies in the Baker River Watershed from other sources.   T16- Rare Plant Study update  08/20/02  By the end of this week, field surveys will have been completed for all the selected wetlands and recreation sites. It was decided by Ann Risvold, Tony Fuchs, and Sarah Price that those recreation sites still under water would be eliminated from the study. Since these areas have spent the majority of the growing season under water, it was felt that the likelihood of encountering a rare plant or Survey and manage species was very small. In addition, most of the areas with recreation sites currently inundated with water are adjacent to upland areas which have been surveyed.  So far we have located the two survey and manage moss species (Schistostega pennata and Tetraphis geniculata), and one survey and manage lichen species ( Platismatia lacunosa). There has been multiple sightings of Schistostega pennata, and only one sighting of the two other species mentioned above.  Following the completion of field surveys, we will begin data entry and the report writing process. Our field maps will be forwarded to Joetta in September so that a GIS map of our findings can be created. The end of September is the current estimated time for the completion of the Rare Plant Study.    2002wildlife20020821.pdf en 