BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group March 12, 2002 12:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 Bring a Sack Lunch – PSE Will Provide Snacks and Drinks  AGENDA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items 4. Discuss APE 5. Discuss UDP 6. Discuss Methods for Testing and evaluating sites (Section V of Research Design) 7. Set agenda for April 9 meeting 8. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Working Group March 12, 2002 12:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m. PSE Office 1700 East College Way, Mt. Vernon  MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process.”  Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com PRESENT: Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Janis Bouma (USFS- Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie-Olympic National Forests), Lee Stilson (Department of Natural Resources), Gary Wessen (Wessen & Associates), Alex Maass (HRA), Gail Thompson (HRA), Lyn Wiltse and Mary Jean Bullock (PDSA Consulting, Inc.) The meeting started at 12:15 and ended at 3:30 p.m. FUTURE MEETING DATES April 9 or May 14, June 11 or July 9, 2002 (NOTE: WE ARE CONSIDERING MEETING EVERY OTHER MONTH) All regular attendees are encouraged to let Jessie know if they are unable to attend a meeting. NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Review 2002 schedule and give input to Jessie. • ALL: Consider different scenarios we may want to run through the Charles Howard Hydro Operations Model. Give input to Jessie. • Larry: Run Unanticipated Discovery Plan (draft) by Tribal Councils for feedback. • Jessie: Send out Aquatics Study Plan when it is available.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 03/12/02 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   • • • • •  Alex: Ask Joetta (R2) to update our APE maps, including dispersed recreation sites within a ¼ mile buffer from the shoreline of both reservoirs. Gail/Jessie: Look at the Baker License, PSE’s ongoing protocol to handle cultural resource issues during project operations/development. How does it support the National Forest Plan? Jessie: Check re: holding our April 9 meeting at tribal location. Let us know. Otherwise, we meet again May 14 – perhaps at the FS Office in Sedro-Woolley. Janis: Send Jessie copy of FS manual dealing with NAGPRA procedures. Janis: Check availability of the Forest Service office in Sedro-Woolley for April meeting.  AGENDA March 12, 2002 noon to 4:00 p.m. at PSE Offices in Mt. Vernon, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items 4. Discuss APE 5. Discuss UDP 6. Discuss methods for testing and evaluating sites 7. Set agenda/location for April 9 meeting 8. Evaluate meeting REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS Jessie: Send out Cultural Resources training outline and contact tribal members to see if they can participate in the archeological piece of the training. • Jessie: Prepare letter to Larry Nelson re: Cultural Training. • Jessie: Contact Charles re: local law enforcement attendance at archaeological training. Note: these three action items postponed indefinitely. • Janis: Checked Forest Service office availability for February 12 meetings Mountlake Terrace/SedroWoolley. • PSE: Clarified situation with Scott Schuyler and attorneys and discussed ramifications of confidentiality concerns and reported back to Cultural Working Group. • Janis: Talked with Jan Hollenbeck to clarify her concerns with project development and maintenance activities on Forest Service land. • ALL: Reviewed latest draft of Unanticipated Discovery Plan and sent comments to Jessie by Friday February 1st.  •  CONFIDENTIALITY PSE and the Tribes have been working with attorneys on including language around confidentiality in the Communication Protocol. The tribes are concerned that the ALP might force them to share culturally sensitive information since FERC ALP guidelines don't specify confidentiality for sensitive cultural documents the way the traditional regulations do. They want to set up protocols to ensure protection of this information especially under the Freedom of Information Act.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 03/12/02 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   Since hearing concerns expressed by agencies bound by FOIA, PSE has decided to remove the language they had suggested be included to protect trade secret or study information from would-be competitors for the Baker Project License. The group expressed concern that the tribes feel comfortable that culturally sensitive information would not be shared inappropriately. They also expressed concern that exceedingly restrictive language might prevent us from meeting management and regulatory objectives. DNR is going through a planning exercise in Lake Whatcom Watershed that includes the Lummi Tribe defining TCPs to the geographic scale to which they feel comfortable. This may be something we can look at here. We are hoping to come up with an approach that will satisfy the interests of all stakeholders. Gordon James, consultant to Office of Indian Affairs, stresses the importance of stating the consequence of time constraints (i.e. not meeting deadlines) when consulting regarding culturally sensitive info. The confidentiality issue will continue to be discussed by attorneys off line. AQUATICS WORKING GROUP STUDY: A-14 “Reservoir Shoreline Erosion” Jessie is still awaiting an outline of this Study Plan. Depending on what the study finds in terms of current and projected erosion rates, we may need to redefine the boundary of our APE. Results of the study might also be coupled with a preliminary predictive model on the occurrence of underwater cultural resources (for example, flat areas near the confluence of the original courses of water bodies). When we get the actual study plan, we’ll be able to build on that to propose an auxiliary study in order to more adequately address our cultural/historical information needs. SCOPING DOCUMENT 1 AND INITIAL CONSULTATION DOCUMENT We discussed Connie’s 2/12/02 memo explaining PSE’s decision (at FERC’s suggestion) to draft Scoping Document 1 and issue it as a companion document to the Initial Consultation Document. All were reminded that the completion of Scoping Document 1 does not mean the end of the issue identification phase, and that PSE is sharing this initial draft in the spirit of collaboration. There will be a public meeting mid-May to discuss both documents and formal comments for the Scoping Document 1 will be due mid-June and for the ICD will be mid-July. CHARLES HOWARD MODEL The Economics Working Group has been on hiatus for most of the last year, as they await the completion of the hydro operations model. At this point the model is still being tested. They have been going through an in-depth review of the Charles Howard Hydro Operations model. It is compatible with Excel and fairly user friendly. They are planning to do a 1-2 hour overview to demonstrate the model and begin to answer questions (including algorithms) at the Economics Working Group April meeting. They will be doing this overview for each of the Working Groups in the various resource areas. They will follow up with a comprehensive all-day workshop in May where any interested working group participant would be encouraged to attend along with any technical folks from their organizations to assist in reviewing the adequacy of the model. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 03/12/02 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   DISCUSSION OF AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECTS (APE) Jessie distributed an initial draft of seven maps showing the initial cut at our APE. She also distributed maps showing dispersed campsites. The Recreation Working Group is still in the process of determining which sites will be included in relevant studies. For archaeological sites, we would certainly consider those near the reservoir. We would additionally consider other sites on a case-by-case basis, according to specific criteria that we agree on. We walked through the dispersed recreation maps and noted which sites we would likely include in our APE. We decided to try out a ¼ mile buffer from both reservoirs. We need to be aware of what could be going on in between the project boundary and our APE. We will look at creating a Memorandum of Agreement with the Forest Service on how to handle cultural resource issues on MBSNF lands between now and the new license. UDP - INTERIM PROTECTION Jessie distributed an updated draft of the Unanticipated Discovery Plan incorporating comments from Janis and Ardis. Since we have not yet finalized the UDP, Jessie and Gary will set up some initial training for consultants and PSE crew working in the field. We will try to do this training before the end of March. METHODS FOR TESTING AND EVALUATING SITES (SECTION V OF RESEARCH DESIGN) With water levels being higher than they were when we surveyed last year, we need to decide whether it makes sense to go out now to do some testing and then go out again later when the pool levels are lower. The consensus was to go ahead and get out in the field to survey areas in the APE and test the sites we can get to. There were no additional comments on Section 5. SCHEDULE FOR 2002 Jessie distributed a PSE Baker Relicense Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group 2002 draft activity schedule. HANDOUTS • Area Of Potential Effects (Map 1 through 7) Unpublished Work Copyright 2001 Puget Sound Energy, Inc. • Dispersed Recreation Sites (Maps 1 through 6) Unpublished Work Copyright PSE Inc. • Updated draft of the Unanticipated Discovery Plan • Section 5 of The Baker River Hydroelectric Project Relicense Research Design. • 2002 Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group Schedule PARKING LOT • “How do we address upland areas?” • Map of general project area, include transmission lines • Upland area—importance of mountain goat BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 03/12/02 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  Keys to access Shannon and Baker Lakes and gates up lake Develop “Area of Potential Effects” Map Coordinate with Terrestrial and Recreation Working Groups Glossary of terms: what are “protection,” “mitigation,” and “enhancement”? Develop TCP (Traditional Cultural Properties) studies Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations Cultural for DNR Land Cultural aspects of Forest and Fish Agreement Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? Have tribal presentations on cultural/spiritual significance of resources Possibility of transplanting young cedar trees Availability of downed cedar for tribal use  MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones • Got out early • Great food • Maps • Getting a lot done • Mapping out 2002 Schedule- Thanks Jessie! Opportunities for Improvement • No tribal participation • Air quality/environment • Don’t stop and review notes so often or in such detail (watch timing). • Missed Bob, Ardis, Rob AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING April 9 or May 14) 2002 from noon to 4:00 p.m. at ????? 1. Introductions 2. Review Minutes/Agenda 3. Action Items 4. APE 5. UDP • Report On Field Personnel Training • Interim Procedure Update 6. Field Work Update 7. Set Agenda For May 14 8. Evaluate Meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 03/12/02 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5    2002cultural20020312.pdf en 