BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group Meeting July 17, 2002 (8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m.) (Bring Sack Lunch) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) AGENDA Review notes/revise agenda/action items Report on June Field Trip Solution Team Update: <b7> Field trip debrief <b7> Public meeting debrief <b7> Settlement Process Development Report on Existing Studies: <b7> Status of previous studies <b7> Teamlet reports <ad> T16 Rare Plants <b7> New Requests/Plans Review/Amend Norms and Parking Lot New Study Requests (?), New Teamlet meetings? Set agenda/location for August 21 (22nd?) meeting, September meeting date Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group July 17, 2002 8:30 a.m. <ad> 2:00 p.m. US Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702)  FINAL MEETING MINUTES  Mission: "To develop alternative solutions and recommendations, addressing terrestrial and wildlife resource interests for the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement that: 1. accurately defines and describes the existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; 2. identifies project effects (existing and proposed) leading to development of protection, mitigation, and enhancement options."  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs, (Phone) 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  ATTENDEES: Stan Walsh (Skagit Systems Cooperative), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Gene Stagner (U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service), Tony Fuchs (Puget Sound Energy), Lauri Vigue (Washington Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Ann Risvold (U.S. Forest Service), Bob Kuntz (National Park Service), Tom Hamer (Hamer Environmental), Martin Vaughn (Biota Pacific), Cary Feldmann (Puget Sound Energy), Kristen Schuldt (Puget Sound Energy), Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics)  SCHEDULE FOR FUTURE MEETINGS: August 21st, September 19th , October 24th  AGENDA Mountlake Terrace, WA July 17, 2002, 8:30 a.m. <ad> 2:00 p.m. 1. Review notes/revise agenda/action items 2. Report on June Field Trip 3. Solution Team Update:  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/17/2002 MEETING NOTES Kristen Schuldt for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1 of 5   <b7> Field trip debrief <b7> Public meeting debrief <b7> Settlement Process Development 4. Report on Existing Studies: <b7> Status of previous studies <b7> Teamlet reports <ad> T16 Rare Plants <b7> New Request/Plans 5. Review/Amend Norms and Parking Lot 6. New Study Requests (?), New Teamlet meetings? 7. Set agenda/location for August 21st meeting, September meeting date 8. Evaluate meeting  NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> Tony: Edit June meeting notes with Lauri's comments and redistribute to team <b7> Tony: Send updated Study Index to all team members <b7> Marty: check with Lia re: the list of possible mixed forest species she prepared <b7> Tony: Send out pdf format of vegetation type cover and Seral Stage maps (when complete) <b7> Tony: T6 and future study comments he will cc comments to all members for information purposes only <b7> Tony: Have Sarah provide map for additional wetland field trip, attend if she can <b7> Tony: Set up wetland field trip <b7> Gene: Lewis River settlement matrix (READ document) is available at http://newwww.pacificorp.com/Article/Article16220.html <b7> Settlement Teamlet: Tony, Lauri, and Ann or Don <ad> verify the issues and predigest possible solutions <b7> Dee, Tom and others: Send electronic versions of handouts to Tony in order to post to website <b7> Marty: Propose how to handle Lake Shannon aspect of historic vegetation map <b7> Lia: Let Marty know why she sees 16 species, Marty only has 14 <b7> Tom: Get revised study plan of T6 to review at September meeting <b7> All: Comment on Elk Habitat Mapping study request and send to Tony for discussion with Chris <b7> Elk Teamlet: Tony, Patrick Stan, Marty, Lauri, Don Gay and Bob Nelson <ad> meet with Chris to resolve issues re: study request on Elk Habitat Mapping <b7> Tony: Email Elk Teamlet with meeting date/time <b7> Marty: Write study request for Phase II of Historic Vegetation <ad> without project scenario  OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Patrick: Researched applicable early County maps and there was nothing useful <b7> All: Reviewed the Draft T6 Noxious Weed Study Plan and provide comments to Tony, which he forwarded on to Tom Hamer <b7> Marty: Distributed copies of the most current T7 Historic Vegetation study plan to all  All old action items were completed, except those carried forward to new action items.  JUNE WETLAND FIELD TRIP <b7> Visited Wetland areas BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/17/2002 MEETING NOTES Kristen Schuldt for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2 of 5   <b7> Behind West Pass Dike where hydrology relates to reservoir <b7> One with own hydrology <ad> good potential for enhancement <b7> Complex near mouth of Sandy Creek - lots of diversity in upper area (were looking at wetlands related to reservoir) <b7> Lauri suggested need some monitoring <ad> mapping is done (T5) <b7> Group discussion for phase 2 - are there monitoring activities to do to determine project effects and monitoring to evaluate areas for enhancement? <b7> The group questioned the need for wetland monitoring. <b7> Marty suggested and group will consider this hypothesis <ad> monitor if we anticipate significant change to reservoir regime that would affect wetlands. With current regime, it's stable wetland situation, meaning that the wetlands currently exist the way they are due to current regime. <b7> What constitutes " significant change"? <b7> What happens during growing season? <b7> Would it be worth looking at additional wetlands and at high water level of ones we looked at last month? <b7> Group agreed they should add an action item to plan looking at wetland maps in August and have another field trip then answer the question re: hydrological monitoring  SOULTION TEAM UPDATE/TIMELINE  <b7> Tony reported that  <b7> Public meetings "kicked off" timing for relicensing  <b7> Applied for ALP <ad> expect approval (team leader note, FERC approved ALP request on  7/19/02)  <b7> Comment period for ICD is almost over  <b7> SD1 is also out for comments  <b7> Dee gave a presentation on the Solution Team's settlement process. She presented a series of  handouts outlining the concepts for the settlement process, and presented the following timeline:  <b7> 1st draft PME's  10/02  <b7> Solution team has draft PME's ready 4/30/03  <b7> 1st draft settlement agreement  7/13/03  <b7> 2nd draft settlement agreement  10/29/03  <b7> Final agreement  3/2/04  <b7> Submit final agreement  4/30/04  <b7> Settlement process discussion: The group voiced concerns about studies still needing to be done,  timing, integrating PME proposals, etc. Dee asked if this working group was willing to follow the  Solution Team's settlement process, and over the next three months, to spend time to identify PME  options and prepare a draft by October. Some work would be done between meetings, but at working  group meetings no more than 90 minutes per meeting will be spent on settlement. The working group  took a vote on their willingness to enter into this process using the following measurements:  Reaching Consensus (Between A & D = Consensus) A. I enthusiastically support the decision; I believe its our best effort B. I find the decision wholly acceptable  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/17/2002 MEETING NOTES Kristen Schuldt for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3 of 5   C. I can live with the decision, but I'm not enthusiastic about it. D. I don't really like the decision, but I won't stand in the way of it's adoption if the rest of the group supports it. I'd like my concerns know. However, once the decision is made I'll support it. E. I don't agree with the decision and I feel strong resistance for its adoption. F. I don't believe the group has come together at all behind the decision. We need more discussion and work before any decisions adopted <b7> Settlement vote outcome and concerns: <b7> Of the 9 people who voted, the total votes were: A = 3, C = 2, D = 4 <b7> Are we putting the cart before the horse? <b7> Are we taking away valuable time from study plan development? <b7> Are we going to cut out important studies as a result of this process?  TEAMLET REPORTS / REPORTS ON EXISTING STUDIES  Study # T2 T4  Title Vegetation Mapping in Project Area Analysis Species Assessment  T5 Wetland Inventory Study T6 Noxious Weed Assessment and Control Plan T7 Historic Vegetation of the UB and LB Projects T11 Oregon Spotted Frog Inventory T13 Survey and Manage Terrestrial  Notes/Next Steps R2 <ad> translation of polygon/cover type ID's from spreadsheets to by done by July 19th. QA/QC to follow. <b7> Hamer will focus on this (only 10% done currently). <b7> Species list handed out along with Analysis Species Literature Search Procedure handout and group reviewed them. <b7> Re: unknown species <ad> not critical path item right now. <b7> Ann conveyed Don's concerns need deadlines, also "species to be determined list" <ad> may be able to drop for some habitat types. Group agreed the teamlet could decide. <b7> Lauri suggestion: Bat survey. <b7> Literature summaries will be done this fall. <b7> Lia will provide examples of some species review by the next meeting. Discrepancies in some of wetland identifications. Joetta is reconciling, it's minor. Wetlands inventoried in the T5 study are mapped together with cover types from the T2 study. Not discussed at this meeting. Marty will add references for predictive model <ad> Lauri will get a copy of BLM reference to Marty. GLO input done July 16th for Lake Shannon. Digitizing of delineated overlays from AESI for Baker Lake finished by July 31. Taking info from spreadsheets and plotting coordinates. Final report will be done by August 30th By September 7th final report will be done (assuming Joetta  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/17/2002 MEETING NOTES Kristen Schuldt for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4 of 5   Mollusk Survey  can get maps to Hamer)  T15 Basin Vegetation Mapping  By end of next week draft will be available. Mapping and  Seral Stage draft maps are ready for review.  T16 Project Area Rare Plant Survey <b7> Started field work after special workshop (see update on handout). Tom reported that it looks like they'll finish  on time.  <b7> Groups response to Sarah's questions (in handout):  <b7> Re: 51 sites in inundation zone <ad> group suggested  they be attempted in the fall after rest of survey  (if there signs of vegetation Sarah should look)  <b7> Okay not to show survey route as long as survey boundaries are delineated on maps (assume  complete survey w/in boundary)  <b7> Should she conduct rare plant survey on SE end  of Baker Lake? <ad> Sarah will coordinate with Ann  and Ann will make the determination  <b7> Group concurred: Hamer to identify grasses only  to level of genus unless easily to sp.  <b7> Ann noted that Hypogymnia need to be taken to  species level <ad> it's on the USFS Survey and  Manage species list.  <b7> Sarah needs list of all sites to be surveyed <ad> her numbers  aren't matching up.  <b7> Tony explained that dispersed recreation sites were  selected during a teamlet with Ann, Lauri and Erin.  Wetland sites were ones where hydrology influenced by  reservoir  T17 R-T09 R-T10 R-T12 R-T18 R-T19 R-T20  Amphib. Studies in Reservoir Fluctuation Zone Recreation Use Study Recreation effects on Mt. Goat Habitat Use Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging Habitat Value Breeding Bird Surveys Habitat Evaluation Studies Wildlife Use in the Reservoir Drawdown Zone  Taking UTM coordinates from spreadsheets and plotting coordinates. Final draft report will be done by September 15th Not discussed at this meeting. Not discussed at this meeting. Not discussed at this meeting. Not discussed at this meeting. Not discussed at this meeting. (other than that Lauri would like to try to move this study forward, and is on agenda for next meeting). Not discussed at this meeting.  NEW STUDY REQUESTS BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/17/2002 MEETING NOTES Kristen Schuldt for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5 of 5   <b7> Elk Habitat Mapping request distributed by Tony <b7> Marty will write study request for Phase II of Historic Vegetation <ad> without project scenario  DATES OF UPCOMING WORKING GROUP ACTIVITIES <b7> Additional wetland field trip <ad> August 15th Lauri, Ann, Tony, Marty <b7> Settlement Teamlet meeting <ad> July 30th in Olympia 10am to 3pm <b7> Date for feedback on issues <ad> July 26th <b7> Elk Teamlet meeting <ad> to be determined  HOT ITEMS FOR SOLUTION TEAM <b7> Should studies be posted on PSE website? <b7> Requests <b7> Plans <b7> Indexes <b7> We are not slacking! These are tough issues we're dealing with  HANDOUTS <b7> Flowchart of Iterative Process for getting the PME's done (from Solution Team) <b7> How to RESOLVE Issues Jointly (Agreement Dynamics) <b7> Draft Summary of Terrestrial Resource Issues <b7> List of original Issues/Interests <b7> Memo to Baker Team Leaders from Dee Endelman re: Framing the Issues for Collaborative Problem Solving <b7> T16 Rare plant study update <b7> Analysis Species Literature Search Procedure <b7> Baker River Project Terrestrial Analysis Species <b7> Process for elevating issues to the Solution Team  PARKING LOT <b7> Conceptual Mitigation Approach (P/M/Es) <b7> Review time frame/goals of working groups/milestones <b7> Definitions of "project boundary", "project effects", "previous environment", "project area", NEPA definitions <b7> Watershed Analysis Presentation <b7> Land Management <ad> Do study? <b7> Make list of all available relevant data. Create a subset of those data for Tony to always bring to meetings for group to continually reference. <b7> Are transmission lines in or out of FERC boundary? <b7> Changing Climate Patterns <b7> Determine land management allocations within Project boundary  MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones <b7> Gene was here BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/17/2002 MEETING NOTES Kristen Schuldt for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6 of 5   <b7> Dee was good <b7> Positive energy Opportunities to Improve <b7> Missed Lyn (Mother Hen) <b7> No Krispy Kremes TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR OUR AUGUST 21 MEETING Mountlake Terrace, Washington 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. Bring a sack lunch and we'll work through! 1. Review notes/agenda/action items 2. Settlement Process Development 3. HEP study discussion 4. Revisit Study List 5. Report on Existing Studies <b7> Status of previous studies <b7> Teamlet Reports <b7> New Requests/Plans 5. Review/Amend Norms and Parking Lot 6. Set agenda/location for September 19th meeting 7. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/17/2002 MEETING NOTES Kristen Schuldt for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 7 of 5    2002wildlife20020717.pdf en 