BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group September 22nd, 2003 9:00 a.m. <ad> 2:30 p.m. USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 21905 64th Ave. West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 AGENDA 1. Lake Shannon Development Feasibility: Jamie VanDeVander 2. Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items 3. Review Comments on Studies & set timeline to incorporate responses into final drafts. <b7> R9-Electyronic Monitoring <b7> R 11/15 (Capacity Suitability Analysis) <b7> R 12 (Dispersed Site Inventory) <b7> R13 Recreation Visitor Surveys <b7> R16-Recreation Needs Analysis 4. Review Forest Service Access Management EA 5. A14a: Shoreline Erosion Review 6. Dave's update 7. Debrief RESOLVE session on September 15 here. 8. Set agenda for October 27, 2003 9. Evaluate Meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group September 22, 2003 9:00 a.m. <ad> 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA 98273 FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: "To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement." Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): andrew.hatfield@pse.com, (360) 853-8341. PRESENT Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Ardis Bynum-on phone and Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), James Van De Vanter, (Van De Vanter Group), Andy Hatfield (Puget Sound Energy ), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator, and Mary Jean Wiltse, notetaker (PDSA Consulting). 2003 SCHEDULE Oct. 3 RESOLVE, Oct. 27, Nov.17 (third Monday), December 15 (third Monday). All meetings are at the Forest Service Office in Mountlake Terrace from 9:00 to 2:30. CONFERENCE CALL LINE: ALL WERE REMINDED, TO CALL IN ON THE CONFERENCE CALL LINE WHEN UNABLE TO ATTEND IN PERSON: 1-800-582-8948 AND ENTER PARTICIPANT CODE: *0526465* September 22, 2003 Agenda 9:00am to 3:00pm NOTE: BRING LUNCH: BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Lake Shannon Development Feasibility: Jamie Van De Vanter Baker River Project Relicense 9-22-03 Meeting FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group   2. Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items 3. Review Comments on Studies: <b7> R5- Visual/Aesthetics Studies <b7> R9-Electronic Monitoring <b7> R 11/15 (Capacity Suitability Analysis) <b7> R 12 (Dispersed Site Inventory) <b7> R13 Recreation Visitor Surveys <b7> R16-Recreation Needs Analysis 4. Review Forest Service Access Management EA 5. A14a: Shoreline Erosion Review 6. Dave's update (Andy will give) 7. Debrief RESOLVE session on September 15 here. 8. Set agenda for October 27, 2003 9. Evaluate Meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> Andy: Send R5 Survey Methodology (with locations) to Ann. <b7> Andy: Check with Tony re: locations of Hamer fire ring sites. Are they predominantly in the drawdown zone? Also, ask Tony to share this information with Jessie for the Cultural Working Group. <b7> All: See if you can attend the Terrestrial Working Group meeting at Mountlake Terrace on October 16 to review a mylar overlay map of the high, medium, and low erosion areas called out in the study to evaluate potential cross-resource considerations. (Andy will send out the invitation asap.) <b7> All: Get Andy your comments on R16: Needs Analysis by October 14. <b7> Andy: See that R9 Report (Electronic Monitoring) gets posted to the website by October 6. <b7> Andy: Set up meeting with Jamie and Brian, then with Lloyd re: Lake Shannon Development Feasibility and access associated with it. <b7> Andy: Talk with Mark re: when he can get the R5 (Aesthetics) report out. <b7> Chris: Talk with Joetta re: priorities for Recreation Studies (R12 is first priority, then R11/15.) and get an idea of a schedule for next iteration of study reports. <b7> Andy: Send out electronic copies of R13 comments/responses along with notification of conference call on September 26 from 10:00 to 1:00. <b7> Andy: Distribute updated contact list. <b7> Andy/Lyn: Discuss putting expected posting dates for all studies on the website (for all Working Groups). <b7> Chris/Andy: Distribute CD's with locked R12 database tied to GIS to team members. A draft of this database is posted on the FTP site. We need to get a replacement GPS reading for one site. Andy will button up with Tony re: possible additional dispersed that may need to be included. <b7> Chris: Once folks are confident in the accuracy of the database (R12) locked up the fields. <b7> Andy: Have Nancy get GPS location for "missing" campsite(s). <b7> Lyn: Check with Team Leaders to see that all are handling conversion to NAVD '88 consistently. <b7> Ann and Ardis: Come up with proposal on how to proceed with Ann's concern #14 re: R11/15. They will need input from all directions on this.  Baker River Project Relicense, September 22, 2003 Meeting FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group  2   INTRODUCTIONS We welcomed Jamie Van De Vanter, landscape architect with the Van De Vanter Group, who is working on Lake Shannon Development options for us.  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Lauri: Checked with Tom Hamer re: additional dispersed sites found by Hamer Environmental during wetland inventory and button up with Andy. <b7> Andy: Touched base with EDAW re: NAVD '88 conversions. <b7> Andy: Sent copies of Greta's email to members not physically present at the August 7 Working Group meeting. <b7> Andy: Asked Tony to get concurrence from the Terrestrial Working Group of ecologically sensitive constraint maps. He is awaiting a reply. <b7> Jim: Sent out Lewis River Management Plan to Andy when it is ready for public review. <b7> Lauri: Discussed field trip observations at the next Terrestrial Working Group meeting with regard to setting possible "triggers". Andy has emailed to recreation members a summary of their recommendations. We will continue to with the Terrestrial Working Group on a site by site basis. <b7> Paul: Sent Patrick hard copies of "non-average" (e.g., wet years) runs. <b7> Chris: Informed Joan that the Baker Roadless Area be included in the PDEA. <b7> Andy: Got land ownership/real estate map to Ann re: PSE land ownership at Scott Camp and the Delta. He brought them to our Sept. 22 meeting. <b7> Andy: Buttoned up with Chris re: issuing 2nd draft study reports (addressing comments).  LAKE SHANNON DEVELOPMENT FEASIBILITY Jamie Van De Vanter showed us some preliminary conceptual designs for recreation sites on Lake Shannon. He described a handout outlining the Campground Program Elements for Overnight Use, Day Use Area, Boat Launch Area, Site Accessories, Site Utilities, and Management.  Site Design Goals (largely from Skagit County) <b7> Enhance Specific Site Character and Views <b7> Preserve Significant Existing Trees, Native Vegetation, and Required Stream Buffers <b7> Vegetative Buffers Between Varying Campground Uses <b7> High and Dry, Level Campsites <b7> Day Use Area for Seasonal Use (between water elevations 425 - 438) <b7> Boat Launch for Seasonal Use (between water elevations 400 - 438) <b7> Adequate Access for RV vehicles <b7> Safety of Users <b7> Future Expansion Potential  Design Water Levels <b7> EL. 438 <ad> Full Pool During Winter Months, Edge of Existing Tree Line <b7> EL. 400 <ad> Current Lowest Recreation Season Level <b7> EL. 425 - 439 <ad> Planned Day Use Encroachment within Drawdown Area, Non-Permanent Facilities below EL. 438.  <b7> EL.400 - 438 <ad> Planned Boat Launch Access  Baker River Project Relicense, September 22, 2003 Meeting FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group  3   James and Andy will be meeting separately with Bryan Adams to get feedback on this approach. Bryan was unable to attend our meeting today. Jamie reviewed with us the attributes, opportunities, and drawbacks of each of the following four sites: <b7> Existing Campground (good access to the lake) <b7> 3 Mile Creek Campground (3 miles North of existing site, on east side of lake, with good access to the lake) This is approximately 1500 feet away from the nearest road (as the crow flies). <b7> Bear Creek (above the Narrows, on West side, no view of Mt. Baker). This is approximately 1 <bd> miles from the nearest road (as the crow flies). <b7> Alder Grove (above the Narrows, on East side, nice views of Mt. Baker for most campsites due to gentle slope). This is approximately 1500 feet away from the nearest logging road (as the crow flies).  We have not yet explored access to these sites. Jamie and Andy will meet with Lloyd re: this issue after getting Bryan's feedback.  If an alternate site is chosen the planning for dealing with existing site will be important. The magnitude of development on the alternate sites would be much more than for the existing sites. Accessibility will also be an issue. It should be in the program as should beach access. Jamie will also review the density of these sites (developmental level). Slope stability issues should also be examined along with proximity to existing roads.  REVIEW COMMENTS ON STUDIES:  Study # Title  R-R5  Visuals and Aesthetics Study  Request  R-7 Recreation Use Survey <ad> Literature Review R-9 Recreation Use Survey <ad> Electronic Monitoring  R-11/15 Recreation Capacity and Suitability Analysis  Notes/Next Steps Andy reported they finished this the weekend of September 13, 14. A total of 203 surveys were completed. Mark will bring preliminary survey results to our October meeting. Andy will call Mark September 24 re: his progress. Andy will button up with Ann on this prior to our next meeting. Subsumed in R14 study. Ann and Ardis agreed that this report is pretty straight forward. We agreed to call this report "final". As additional information becomes available, we will append it to the report. Andy will see this gets posted to the website by October 6. Chris reviewed with us the following outstanding issues that need to be resolved before releasing this report as :final draft". We agreed to: <b7> Split Out (list separately) Horseshoe Cove and Bay View sites (see Tables 2-3 through 2-6) <b7> List Boulder Park Creek, Kulshan and the Resort  Baker River Project Relicense, September 22, 2003 Meeting FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group  4   R-12 R-13  Dispersed Site Inventory Recreation Visitor Surveys  separately, as there may be significant changes on these going forward (environmental issues). <b7> We agreed to change "0%" grizzly habitat to a paragraph that explains these data are not yet available and that there is a grizzly study in Terrestrial Working Group Study (#T12). <b7> Chris will also add a paragraph describing the A14 erosion study and that this should be taken into consideration on a site-by-site basis. In the meantime, recreation folks are invited to attend the Terrestrial Working Group meeting at Mountlake Terrace on October 16 to review a mylar overlay map of the high, medium, and low erosion areas called out in the study to evaluate potential cross-resource considerations. With these changes this report will be sent out as "final draft". Additional information, as it becomes available, will be appended to the report. Outstanding Issues: <b7> More descriptive information on dispersed site clusters. Andy will address this by October 6. <b7> Larger scale mapping to better show an array of sites. We agreed to look at the resources we have in terms of GIS data and the sketches we have of site clusters (don't all have to be the same scale). We will see what differentiation we have to display what clusters look like. <b7> We have already distinguished drawdown vs. upland sites. These will be integrated into Map 3.1 and enlarged in scale. <b7> Boating Safety: We agreed to include a table with this information in the report. <b7> We agreed to put in all conference call information with the following exceptions: <b7> Dispersed sites vs. rare plants (Reference in R11/15.) <b7> Old and ancient forest (Reference in R11/15.) <b7> Elk habitat <b7> Dispersed sites at Lower Boulder: These sites weren't used in 2001season. We agreed to show them on the map (their approximate locations) and say these areas are closed and not part of the 2001 inventory. <b7> Hamer "Fire rings": We will review these when we get the data from the Terrestrial Working Group (see action items). Resolution of Issues Identified by USFS:  Baker River Project Relicense, September 22, 2003 Meeting FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group  5   R-14 R-16  Secondary Data Collection Recreation Needs Analysis  1. Charts and corresponding discussion will be put on the same page to the extent possible. 3. The detail of "Other" responses will be included in the appendix. 27. For Question 15 and others with defined categories we will add a paragraph re: affinitization with the "Other" classification. We will note the % for each sub grouping. 4. We will add the total population (# responses) for each group. Next Steps: We agreed to continue discussion of issues raised by USFS and the sufficiency of the responses to each (where the response was anything other than agreement with the comment) during a conference call from 10:00 to 1:00, Friday, September 26. Lyn will facilitate. (Not discussed at 9/22 meeting.) Ongoing. We set the deadline for comments on this for October 14.  UPDATE OF FOREST SERVICE LAND MANAGEMENT EA Ann reported the Forest Service is in the process of identifying management alternatives. She will give us an update at our October meeting.  HANDOUTS <b7> Review Comments and Responses, R13 March 2003 Draft Study Report <b7> Lake Shannon Camp ground Feasibility Study (prepared by Jamie Van De Vanter)  PARKING LOT <b7> Land Management <b7> Hold periodic "outreach" meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) <b7> Field trip - summer 2003? <b7> Review USFS Roads Analysis Report - 2003 <b7> Tie education piece to all Working Groups <b7> Access Management Study? <b7> Integration of Elk/Grizzly study data.  STUDIES SUMMARY FOR SOLUTION TEAM <b7> Finalizing studies: <b7> Tension between getting them "out" for review by other groups and getting them in final (complete and accurate) form. <b7> Lake Shannon Development Feasibility Study: Four potential sites were identified. Next step will be around getting legal access to these sites.  EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well <b7> Jamie's presentation Baker River Project Relicense, September 22, 2003 Meeting FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group  6   Things To Do Differently Next Time <b7> Ran late <b7> Missed Brian! <b7> Phone technology (virtual planning!) <b7> Participation is lower than general in these technical What's Hot? <b7> People are more focused on PME's now more (than technical meetings). <b7> Education PME (disparate interests). October 27, 2003 Agenda 9:00am to 2:30pm NOTE: BRING LUNCH: BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items 2. Update on R5: Visual/Aesthetics Studies 3. Update on Lake Shannon Development Feasibility Study 4. Update on Study Reports: <b7> R11/15 (Capacity Suitability Analysis) <b7> R12 (Dispersed Site Inventory) <b7> R13 (Recreation Visitor Surveys) <b7> R16 (Recreation Needs Analysis) 5. Status of Forest Service Access Management EA 6. A14a: Shoreline Erosion Review (report from Oct. 16 mapping exercise) 7. Koma Kulshan Outdoor School Report 8. Set agenda for November 24 Meeting 9. Evaluate Meeting  Baker River Project Relicense, September 22, 2003 Meeting FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group  7    2003recreational20030922.pdf en 