 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group August 25th, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 21905 64th Ave. West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 AGENDA 1. Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items • Announcement re: record sockeye return • Debrief of field trips 3. Review Comments on Studies: • R5- Visual/Aesthetics Studies • R9-Electyronic Monitoring • R 11/15 (Capacity Suitability Analysis) • R 12 (Dispersed Site Inventory) • R13 Recreation Visitor Surveys • R16-Recreation Needs Analysis 4. HYDROPS Update-Paul Wetherbee 5. Debrief of RESOLVE Session of 8/11 6. Review draft outline of Recreation Management Plan 7. Review Forest Service Land Management EA 8. Lake Shannon Development Feasibility 9. A14a: Shoreline Erosion Review 10. Set Agenda for September 22, 2003 11. Evaluate Meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group August 25, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA 98273 Final MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): andrew.hatfield@pse.com, (360) 853-8341. PRESENT Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Lauri Vigue (WDFW), Ardis Bynum-on phone and Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council ), Susan Rosebrough (National Park Service), Jim Eychaner (IAC), Paul Wetherbee, Dave Reid and Andy Hatfield (Puget Sound Energy ), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator, and Mary Jean Wiltse, notetaker (PDSA Consulting). 2003 SCHEDULE Sept. 22, Oct. 27, Nov.17 (third Monday), December 15 (third Monday). Assume we are meeting at the Forest Service Office in Mountlake Terrace from 9:00 to 2:30 unless otherwise specified. CONFERENCE CALL LINE: ALL WERE REMINDED, TO CALL IN ON THE CONFERENCE CALL LINE WHEN UNABLE TO ATTEND IN PERSON: 1-866-280-6429 AND ENTER PARTICIPANT CODE: 144995 #. August 25, 2003 Agenda 9:00am to 3:00pm Baker River Project Relicense 8-25-03 Meeting FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group NOTE: BRING LUNCH: BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items • Announcement re: record sockeye return • Debrief of field trips 2. Review Comments on Studies: • R5- Visual/Aesthetics Studies • R9-Electyronic Monitoring • R 11/15 (Capacity Suitability Analysis) • R 12 (Dispersed Site Inventory) • R13 Recreation Visitor Surveys • R16-Recreation Needs Analysis 3. TST Update-Paul Wetherbee 4. Debrief of RESOLVE Session of 8/11 5. Review draft outline of Recreation Management Plan 6. Review Forest Service Land Management EA 7. Lake Shannon Development Feasibility 8. A14a: Shoreline Erosion Review 9. Set Agenda for September 22, 2003 10. Evaluate Meeting INTRODUCTIONS: We welcomed Paul Wetherbee, Team Leader of the Technical Scenario Teamlet. ANNOUNCEMENTS Andy reported that the sockeye return has now exceeded 20,000. This is over 6 times the historic average! NEW ACTION ITEMS • Andy: Distribute updated contact list. • Andy: Send out CD’s with locked R12 database tied to GIS to team members by 6/30/03. A draft of this database is posted on the FTP site. Joetta is ironing out field inconsistencies. • Chris: Once folks are confident in the accuracy of the database (R12) locked up the fields. • Andy: Have Nancy get GPS location for “missing” campsite(s). • Lauri: Check with Tom Hamer re: additional dispersed sites found by Hamer Environmental during wetland inventory and button up with Andy. • Andy: Touch base with EDAW re: NAVD conversions. • Lyn: Check with Team Leaders to see that all are handling conversion to NAVD consistently. • Andy: Send copies of Greta’s email to members not physically present at the August 7 Working Group meeting. • Andy: Ask Tony to get concurrence from the Terrestrial Working Group of ecologically sensitive constraint maps. • Jim: Send out Lewis River Management Plan to Andy when it is ready for public review. • Lauri: Discuss field trip observations at the next Terrestrial Working Group meeting with regard to setting possible “triggers”. Baker River Project Relicense, August 25, 2003 Meeting 2 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group • Paul: Send Patrick hard copies of “non-average” (e.g., wet years) runs. • Andy: Send R5 Survey Methodology (with locations) to Ann. • Chris: Inform Joan that the Baker Roadless Area be included in the PDEA. • Andy: Get land ownership/real estate map to Ann re: PSE land ownership at Scott Camp and the Delta. • Ann and Ardis: Come up with proposal on how to proceed with Ann’s concern #14 re: R11/15. • Andy: Button up with Chris re: issuing 2nd draft study reports (addressing comments). REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Chris: Incorporated comments into next versions of draft reports. • Ann: Gave additional information re: dispersed sites (missing and mislocated) to Chris. • Andy: Followed up with Lauri re: dispersed sites. • Cary: Sent Andy NAVD-adjusted reservoir level diagram to distribute. • Andy: Sent out updated reservoir level maps to all (NAVD). • Andy: Got copy of R11/15 to Ardis. • Ann: Emailed Andy and copied Chris on her comments re: R11/15. • Chris: Sent Ardis electronic version of R12 matrix distributed at this meeting. • Chris: Followed-up with Alex re: glitches in electronic analysis of R12 matrix attributes and sent out edited version of matrix prior to our August 25 meeting. Chris reported that this is in process. Part A is handled. We will have a final copy before our September meeting. • ALL: Reviewed R12 maps and saw if they answered the questions we had and considered next steps. We’ll discuss this at our August 25 meeting. Note: These are all posted on the FTP website. • Andy: Sent out instructions for accessing the FTP website to all members. • Andy: Sent out next draft of Recreation Management Plan by August 13. DEBRIEF OF FIELD TRIPS We discussed the findings from our two field trips this month. Team members went out on August 5 and August 11. We were concerned with some of the dispersed sites on the east side of the lake. We found these sites contained mature growth- but nothing of concern from an LSR standpoint. We saw some signs of impact, especially on west side of the lake. The need for hardening was discussed. Also, the need to educate folks about how to best use dispersed sites (e.g., “Leave No Trace cards”) was identified. Patrick reminded us that the east side of the lake is designated as Inventoried Roadless Area by the Roadless Area Conservation Rule established in 2001 and reconfirmed in June, 2003, and should be managed accordingly. Jim informed us that we are likely to need more aggressive management for sites accessible by motor vehicle. We also discussed sending out a field crew during peak times to monitor and maintain. We would need to establish “trigger points” that would cause us to take action. Baker River Project Relicense, August 25, 2003 Meeting 3 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group Marty has sent out a summary of findings to field trip participants for review. TST (TECHNICAL SCENARIO TEAMLET) UPDATE Paul Wetherbee (Team Leader of the TST) explained how this cross-resource technical working group is working with hydrological and habitat models to provide Working Group members with technical analyses of various flow regimes. The HYDROPS model is nearly complete, as is the first half of the Middle Skagit Habitat Model. The final piece of the physical habitat simulation model is scheduled to be complete in mid-September. Initial runs include Recent Conditions and Draft Actions (for purposes of the PDEA). The TST have also completed (about 10) runs requested by the Skagit Systems Cooperative. Paul distributed sample standardized input and output packages for HYDROPS run requests. The TST has established five energy years (August 1 through July 31) which constitute the full hydrologic spectrum. They have set up an e-Room where TST members can view the voluminous results of various model runs. They have also set up various levels of analysis. The samples distributed today are 2A. This is the standard high level (briefest) level of analysis. There is also a Level 3 (with more frequency curves). Level 4 would only be run on a few runs, and the results would fill a CD. REVIEW COMMENTS ON STUDIES: Study # Title Notes/Next Steps R-R5 Visuals and Aesthetics Study Andy reported that field surveys with 28 photos selected by Request Ann and Andy began last week. We have completed over 30 surveys so far. We are hoping for 200 between now and September 15. The goal of these surveys is to determine sensitivity to reservoir elevations. These surveys are being done at the Visitor Center, Ranger station and developed sites. R-7 Recreation Use Survey – Subsumed in R14 study. Literature Review R-9 Recreation Use Survey – (Not discussed at 8/25 meeting.) Chris reported that he Electronic Monitoring hasn’t yet received feedback on this report. There was .a question about including (on p. 42) the median visitor group size of 2.4. It was suggested we add a footnote indicating the source of this (it is important to note that the source of this number is not just from electronic monitoring). Any comments received after September 2 will be responded to and treated as addenda to the report. Between now and then we’ll get the chance to approve how comments received have been integrated into the report. Comments will be dated. Substantive comments will stay “live” (vs. treated as addenda) until they have been integrated into the report to Baker River Project Relicense, August 25, 2003 Meeting 4 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group the mutual satisfaction of all. (This process will be used to “finalize” all reports.) R-11/15 Recreation Capacity and We reviewed comments from this Draft Study Report: Suitability Analysis Lauri’s Comments: 1. Add a sentence referring to R16 (Needs Analysis). 2. Objectives statement was revised satisfactorily 3. List of Terrestrial Working Group members who attended January 7, 2003 meeting was added. 4. We added integration of elk/grizzly data to our Parking Lot. If we use white papers, they need to be linked to study reports. We need to ensure that the white papers carry the same weight as the other study reports. 5. Add statement in the report saying the Terrestrial Working Group members did not validate constraint maps. These will serve as course filters for subsequent site-by-site review/analysis. Ann’s Comments: 1. We will clarify map definitions: e.g., “high constraint (low suitability)”. 2. Chris will verify that we note the source (and that it has some issues) in the text. 3. Chris will verify that we note the source (and that it has some issues) in the text. 4. Complete. 5. Complete. 6. Andy will follow-up with Ann re: PSE land ownership at Scott Camp and the Delta. 7. Ann will review this table again to see if there is a need to separate out Horseshoe and Bayview into two separate development nodes. 8. We agreed to summarize constraints on existing recreation in the Needs Analysis. 9. We will note that this was a one-time snapshot done in early spring as opposed to ongoing monitoring through the summer. 10. Complete. 11. Complete. 12. Complete. 13. There is a need to ensure that trail study results are included in the Recreation Management Plan. We also need to reference this in the Needs Analysis. 14. Ann and Ardis will get together to come up with a proposal on how to address this concern. 15. Agreement on this. 16. Agreement on this. Baker River Project Relicense, August 25, 2003 Meeting 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group R-12 Dispersed Site Inventory Dispersed Site Inventory: We reviewed Ann’s Comments: 1. We agreed to write an introductory paragraph for each of the dispersed site clusters to more fully describe their characteristics (e.g., what are the positive and negative attributes of each). We would bring out the salient points (impressions, flavors, etc.), to facilitate subsequent decision making. Andy will address this. 2. Complete. 3. See #1 above. Andy will address. 4. Handled. 5. Handled. 6. Add notation that tent sizes vary. Andy will discuss this with Nancy. There was no standard assumption regarding tent size when the survey was conducted. 7. No action. 8. No action. 9. Complete. 10. Complete. 11. No action. 12. Complete. 13. Complete. September 2 is the deadline for feedback on this study. R-13 Recreation Visitor Surveys (Not discussed at 8/25 meeting.) There are concerns over the mixing of Shannon and Baker data. Also questionable is the use of percentages when the numbers are low (this is misleading). We need to clarify some of the graphs/tables. We also agreed that we need to show the data from the “Other” category for some of the responses (especially where they were fairly sizeable). We will include these as an appendix to the report. Chris reported that he affinitized these responses to the extent possible. The “unlumpable”, unique responses are the only ones that remain in the “Other” category. We need to develop a key for the breakout groups that are repeated often to facilitate easy review of the results. September 2 is the deadline for feedback on this report. R-14 Secondary Data Collection (Not discussed at 8/25 meeting.) Ongoing. R-16 Recreation Needs Analysis (Not discussed at 8/25 meeting.) September 2 is the deadline for feedback on this report. DEBRIEF OF RESOLVE SESSION –8/11 On 8/11, we reached some good conceptual agreements. However, these lack sufficient detail to afford participants the level of certainty they would like going forward. Andy is taking a stab at drafting some of this detail. He will get this out for review by September 8. The next RESOLVE meeting will be Baker River Project Relicense, August 25, 2003 Meeting 6 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group September 15, here at Mountlake Terrace. Concern was expressed about overlap between RESOLVE sessions and regular Working Group (technical) meetings. It seems like the technical meeting is lagging behind the RESOLVE session. RESOLVE sessions should stay more focused and interest based. REVISED DRAFT OUTLINE OF RECREATION MANAGEMENT PLAN Andy reviewed the changes he made based on feedback from Working Group members. Andy will incorporate changes into a third draft of this plan and send it out. REVIEW FOREST SERVICE ACCESS MANAGEMENT EA Ann reported that there was nothing new to report in this. The newspaper release is planned for September. LAKE SHANNON FEASIBILITY Andy reported that Jamie VanDeVander will attend our next meeting with some preliminary conceptual designs for recreation sites on Lake Shannon. A14a: SHORELINE EROSION REVIEW No comments at this time. We will discuss reactions to Greta’s suggested Next Steps (as per her email) at our September meeting. OUTDOOR SCHOOL TEACHERS TRAINING This was held up at Baker Lodge last week. Teams of teachers from Skagit and Whatcom counties were briefed on all the different lessons that kids will be receiving in the outdoor school. HANDOUTS • PSE’s Diagram of Upper Baker Dam- Section View (not to scale) NAVD 29 Elevations (NAVD 88 Elevations) • Sample HYDROPS Input and Output Forms for Draft Action for PDEA • Plastic cards: “Leave no Trace/Outdoor Ethics” for education of visitors • Review Comments and Responses R11/15 April 2003 Draft Study Report from Ann Dunphy 6/22/03 • Review Comments and Responses R12 April 2003 Draft Study Report from Ann Dunphy 6/22/03 • PSE Baker River Project Relicense, Draft Recreation Management Plan Outline PARKING LOT • Land Management • Hold periodic "outreach" meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) • Field trip - summer 2003? • Review USFS Roads Analysis Report - 2003 • Tie education piece to all Working Groups • Access Management Study? • Integration of Elk/Grizzly study data. STUDIES SUMMARY FOR SOLUTION TEAM • Ongoing study: R5-Aesthetics Field interviews being conducted August 15-September 15 Baker River Project Relicense, August 25, 2003 Meeting 7 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group • Reviewed comments on R11/15-Capacity/Suitability Analysis • Reviewed comments on R12-Dispersed Site Inventory Comments are due September 2nd for studies above plus: • R9-Recreation Use Surveys • R13-Recreation Visitor Surveys • R16- Recreation Needs Analysis EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well • Got our early • Nice to have Lauri and Patrick here representing Terrestrial • Good study progress • Paul’s update on TST • Good facilitation/humor/Rosette vest Things To Do Differently Next Time • Missed Brian • No jalapeno bagels • Seedless grapes • Need forks and spoons What's Hot? • Cross resource checks • Overlap between RESOLVE and technical working group meetings. September 22, 2003 Agenda 9:00am to 3:00pm NOTE: BRING LUNCH: BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Lake Shannon Development Feasibility: Jamie VanDeVander 2. Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items 3. Review Comments on Studies: • R5- Visual/Aesthetics Studies • R9-Electyronic Monitoring • R 11/15 (Capacity Suitability Analysis) • R 12 (Dispersed Site Inventory) • R13 Recreation Visitor Surveys • R16-Recreation Needs Analysis 4. Review Forest Service Access Management EA 5. A14a: Shoreline Erosion Review 6. Dave’s update 7. Debrief RESOLVE session on September 15 here. 8. Set agenda for October 27, 2003 9. Evaluate Meeting Baker River Project Relicense, August 25, 2003 Meeting 8 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group  