BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group Meeting April 23rd, 2003 (8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m.) (Bring Sack Lunch) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-866-280-6429, code 144995# (Please tell Tony or Lyn (425-890-3613) if you plan to call into meeting)  AGENDA Introductions Review notes/revise agenda/action items PME Refinement • BAWG report • Work through all four levels: - Get agreement on issues to address – Do we have all the “buckets”? - Commit to certain issues to be addressed through management plans after the license has been issued - Agreement on range of actions - Develop details – second draft PMEs Studies Reports • Brief update on existing study reports • New studies and requests: T12 Grizzly,T21 Elk, T23 Bogs • New rare plant surveys: 10 other wetland and Carex flava areas Confirm May 15th (Mountlake Terrace) agenda, meeting location/dates for June, July Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group April 23, 2003 8:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. USFS Office Mountlake Terrace, WA  FINAL MEETING MINUTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations, addressing terrestrial and wildlife resource interests for the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement that: • accurately defines and describes the existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; • identifies project effects (existing and proposed) leading to development of protection, mitigation, and enhancement options.” Team Leader: Tony Fuchs, (Phone) 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com ATTENDEES Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific), Bob Nelson, (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation), Tony Fuchs and Cary Feldmann (Puget Sound Energy), Lauri Vigue (Washington Dept. Fish & Wildlife) by phone, Laura Potash and Don Gay, (USFS), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental for the Louis Berger Group), Thomas Mohagn (Hamer Environmental), Gene Stagner (USFW), Bob Kuntz (National Park Service), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator, and Mary Jean Bullock, notetaker, (PDSA Consulting, Inc.) SCHEDULE FOR FUTURE WORKING GROUP MEETINGS (At USFS Building in Mountlake Terrace unless otherwise specified) May 15, June 19, July 17, Aug. 21, Sept. 18, Oct.16, Nov. 20 (locations?) THE CONFERENCE CALL LINE WILL BE OPEN DURING ALL THESE MEETINGS. PLEASE CALL 1-866-280-6429 AND ENTER PARTICIPANT CODE: 144995 #. Let Lyn know before the meeting starts if you are calling in (call her at 425-890-3613). Agenda for April 23, 2003 Meeting USFS Office in Mountlake Terrace 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. (Potentially longer, if needed for PME development) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 4/23/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1 of 8   Bring a sack lunch and we’ll work through! 1. Introductions 2. Review notes/agenda/action items 3. PME Refinement • BAWG report • Get agreement on issues to address – Do we have all the “buckets”? • Commit to certain issues to be addressed through management plans after the license has been issued • Agreement on range of actions. • Develop details - second draft PMEs 4. Confirm location and set agenda for our May 15, 2003 meeting (at MLT) 5. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS • Kathy: Send electronic version of PDEA schedule to Tony to distribute. • Laura: Review Carex Flava Analysis Species Report and send comments back to Hamer by April 30. • Lauri: Review Sphagnum Bog Analysis Species/Survey Report and send comments back to Hamer by April 30. (Team Leader note: there is some confusion over what this should be. Will be discussed at next meeting). • Tony: Post all latest versions (with dates) of GIS products on R2’s FTP site. • Tony: Have AESI put together draft study plan for T5b monitoring study of wetland WB 30 prior to our May 15 meeting. • Kathy: Summarize level of land use information that is needed for the EA. • Don: Check with Skagit County/Fire Department re: residence maps. • Kathy: Send website link for FERC guidelines for Shoreline Management Plan to Tony to distribute. • Lyn: Bring up Shoreline Management Plan for Shannon at the May 14 workshop • ALL: Give Tony input re: terrestrial interests related to the HYDROPS model. • Tony: Post T7 and T13 Reports to the PSE website and notify members by email. He will do this as soon as the server problem is fixed and is receiving new data. • Tony: Create a teamlet (Lauri, Don, Patrick, Joetta, Laura?) to discuss updating constraint maps to reflect terrestrial values. • Tony: Send out digital version of amphibian habitat photos. • Cary: Send Tony historical native fish run – timing and bio mass (by timing) so he can distribute with the Final minutes. • Marty: Produce a red-line version of “duck” (Initial Draft Proposed Actions) for all to review by April 25. • ALL: Get Tony feedback on the revised “duck” by noon May 1. • Thomas: Touch base with Tom Hamer re: a plan for additional surveys for carex flava. • ALL: Review T2, 5, 7b, 16, 17 and give comments on these reports by our May 15 meeting. • Don: By April 24, send Tony a revised version of “swan” including Laura’s additions (Swan is the work product of BAWG) • ALL: Send Tony comments on the “swan” and revised duck by April 30.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 4/23/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2 of 8   REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Erin: Wrote up species analysis report for Carex flava and its interaction with Reed Canary Grass prior to our April meeting (April 23rd) and sent to Laura for review. • Tony: Posted T11, 13, 15 and all other maps for existing studies on R-2’s FTP site and let members know when it is there. • ALL: Reviewed T2/T5 reports and T16 reports by next meeting (April 23.) • Tony: Sent out email with instructions for accessing the FTP website (noted on subject line). • Ron: Revised Grizzly study plan to reflect comments expressed during the meeting, and re-issue it to the group (through Tony). • ALL: Reviewed the Grizzly study plan and let Tony know if they feel a conference call teamlet is necessary • Tony: Re-issued February minutes with additions. • Lauri: Continued checking into getting DNR timber coverages, road information, etc. She has been working hard on getting the data transfer set up. She reported that the data transfer to EDAW will be complete by this afternoon! Thanks Lauri! • Tony: Saw that a Study Plan was drafted to assess influences of change in reservoir levels on the bog. He talked with Tony and AESI to determine the appropriate methodology for doing this. Three monitors have been installed. Stay tuned for the study plan. • Tony: Brought up Live Link application at the next PSE Team Leaders meeting. • Tom: Set up teamlet (Laura, Tony, Carl, etc.) to discuss Analysis Species Carex flava. (Had a conference call.) • Marty: Lined out an approach for developing details around loon PME (work with Lauri). • Don: Set up a teamlet with Lauri, Gene, Bob K. to come up with potential actions for Spotted Owl and Marbled Murrelet. • Tony: Was asked to check with TNC, Skagit Land Trust, and SCL re: land use (projected). He is talking with PSE land use folks about this. They feel it would be premature for him to pursue this at this point. PDEA contractor will be addressing this. • Tony: Considered creating a Shoreline Management Plan draft for Lake Shannon. Kathy did some investigating on this. She talked with Mark Greenig at EDAW and got from him a copy of a handbook for developing FERC shoreline management plans. This plan would specify what type of development we would allow. Mark suggested that we could develop such a plan to emphasize terrestrial/wildlife habitat of the shoreline area. This would be updated every 5-10 years. This would address land with in FERC boundary. This doesn’t have to be consistent with adjacent land use plans. If we do develop a plan, it should involve all the surrounding land owners. We will discuss this at the May 14 Cross-Resource Workshop. • Don: Set up BAWG meeting prior to April 23 Working Group Meeting. Thanks Don! PDEA Update Kathy reported that the partial draft goes to the Solution Team May 1. It contains introductory stuff proposed actions and alternatives. There are two alternatives – no action and proposed action. The existing conditions (affected environment) will be described. There won’t be effects in this preliminary draft. Eventually the effects will be broken out by resource area. Kathy told us the PDEA will consider both project effects and non-project effects as rationale for measures. We will get an update on PDEA progress at the May 14 workshop. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 4/23/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3 of 8   Comments to PSE on this preliminary draft will be due May 30. By August 1, The Environmental Effects section will be provided for Working Groups to review/comment (by August 15). On September 5, Berger will deliver the Draft PDEA to Puget for production and distribution. On October 1, PSE will release the draft PDEA (and License Application Exhibits). January 2, 2004 is the due date for the Draft Application and PDEA comments and for preliminary terms, conditions, and prescriptions (Section 10(j), 4(e), 18). April 30, 2004 is when PSE will file the License Application and Final PDEA. TST (TECHNICAL SCENARIO TEAMLET) UPDATE Paul Wetherbee (newly hired PSE hydrologist) is serving as the leader of this teamlet. So far, the TST has met twice and is meeting weekly to get things set up. The teamlet is made up of representatives from the various resource Working Groups. They will serve as a clearinghouse for scenario requests, providing standardized formats for input and output of model runs. They will supplement results with some interpretation. They will also initiate their own runs, based on results they observe from requests from the different Working Groups. At their next meeting they will come up with a ranking of soft constraints so we can do comparable runs. Tony will be our liaison with this group. HYDROPS UPDATE The Powel Group is finishing up some final modifications to the HYDROPS model. These have been prioritized, according to their importance. The first tier of changes should be complete by 4/28. Re access: the USFS will be getting a computer loaded with the model. Otherwise, there will be a dedicated computer at the PSE offices in Bellevue. There is still the ability to access the model in Victoria through the internet. This connection, however, is very slow. The R-2 Models should be operational by June (early?). We’ll get an update at the May 14 workshop. SHORELINE MANAGEMENT PLAN We agreed to call this out as a line item under the Access Section of the Shared Resources Section of the Initial Draft Proposed Actions. This would include both Lake Shannon and Baker Shoreline (erosion, plan to protect aesthetics, wildlife, plants, etc.) PME REFINEMENT BAWG Report Don walked us through the response to the initial draft proposed actions resulting from the BAWG meeting Monday. He highlighted the changes from the initial draft actions. We had some discussion in order to understand the interests behind these suggested revisions. They identified the upper range of what might be needed. These suggested revisions address a likely worst case scenario. Pieces going forward in the original format (Duck) 1.3.1 Osprey 1.5.1 TERF Fund 1.3.4 Bald Eagle Also: 1.3.3 Habitat for Cavity Nesting Birds: PSE agreed to the revised language 1.1.2 Evaluate the potential for establishing beneficial vegetation in the fluctuation zones. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 4/23/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4 of 8   Assumptions After some discussion about the assumptions of the BAWG in responding to PSE’s Initial Draft Proposed Actions (aka the Duck), we agreed to replace “run of river” with an understanding that the assumptions were of the “entire footprint of the inundation zone”. Don explained that these assumptions are based on T7b, Scenario 1. 4 Levels: • Get agreement on issues to address – Do we have all the “buckets”? The consensus, among members present, was that we do have all the “buckets” that we need to carry forward as PMEs. It was noted that team members who did not attend the BAWG meeting might identify some additional buckets to be addressed. This would have to be done by the end of the month. • Commit to certain issues to be addressed through management plans after the license has been issues (ongoing) • Agreement on range of actions. We agreed to insert the ranges from the work product of the BAWG (aka the Swan) for discussion at the May Cross-Resource Workshop. • Develop details – second draft PMEs. Marty will take the first cut at this, based on the Swan. Laura walked us through the initial draft of suggested revisions to the Draft Proposed Actions: 1.4.1 and 1.4.2. She will incorporate changes from this discussion and get it to Don so he can email it to Tony tomorrow morning. REPORT ON STUDIES Tony reported that T2, T5, T16 were sent out on a CD (finished studies). T17 “final” report was sent out via email. We are awaiting comments on these reports. Marty is the only one who has commented on these. All were asked to get comments to Tony on these plus T7b by our next meeting (May 15). T7 Historic Vegetation of the Upper Baker and Lower Baker projects; T11 OR Spotted Frog inventory; and T13 Surveys and Manage Terrestrial Mollusk Survey are all complete with reports approved. LOON PME Marty distributed a literature review on Common Loon Nesting Platform Design and Placement (written by one of his partners, Doug). This document includes design and placement recommendations. Whenever PSE and/or consultants consults other WDFW staff regarding studies, Lauri should be either cced (E-mail) or send a summary of a phone call. Marty will work to ensure that everyone keeps WDFW (Lauri) in the loop on this. He shared with us a counter-intuitive finding: loon productivity increases with human contact. REPORT ON STUDIES Study # T2  Title  Notes/Next Steps  Vegetation Mapping in Project Area  Awaiting comments on Study report. Will discuss comments/report approval at our May 15 meeting.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 4/23/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5 of 8   T4  Analysis Species Assessment  T5 T6  Wetland Inventory Study Noxious Weed Assessment and Control Plan Historic Vegetation of the UB and LB Projects Future vegetation mapping  T7 T7b T-9,10 T11 R-T12  T13  Recreation use, effects on Mt. Goat Habitat use Oregon Spotted Frog Inventory Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging Habitat Value  T15  Survey and Manage Terrestrial Mollusk Survey Basin Vegetation Mapping  T16  Project Area Rare Plant Survey  T17  Amphibian Studies in Reservoir Fluctuation Zone Breeding Bird Surveys Habitat Evaluation Studies  R-T18 R-T19  The two outstanding species assessments are: Bog/Carex flava. Laura is doing a preliminary review of Carex flava . Lauri is doing a preliminary review of Bog. They will get their comments out to Hamer by end of April. Hamer will incorporate those comments and get these out for broader review by May 7.. This is combined with T-2. See above. These surveys are starting in June. They are getting together site identification maps, etc.. This study is complete and has been approved. Awaiting comments on Study report. Will discuss comments/report approval at our May 15 meeting. Did not discuss at this meeting. Don has drafted a PME for our review with regard to mountain goats. This study is complete and has been approved. They started sampling in the field on April 14. They are using appropriate sampling strategies to avoid rare plants on Forest Service lands. The sampling period will extend to June to get the six samples every two-week period for each cover types. This is on schedule. Marty distributed an update on the study methods for this study. This will be incorporated into the methods section of the final report. They are finding good polygons. Wet meadows may pose a challenge (especially if within ½ mile from road). This study is complete and has been approved. This is complete. It helped us identify critical information for grizzly and elk studies. An additional use for this data set might be helping us understand how many acres of riparian habitat are available for different stream classes. Awaiting comments on Study report. Will discuss comments/report approval at our May 15 meeting. Laura has suggested five other areas to survey for carex flava. Tony suggests that we go ahead and survey these. We agreed. Timing to do the survey will be this summer. Of the ten wetlands that were not surveyed (figure 6 of the Rare Plant report). Tony will get with Laura and Lauri to decide how to proceed. At our May meeting, they’ll let us know what they did. Awaiting comments on Study report. Will discuss comments/report approval at our May 15 meeting. Did not discuss at this meeting. (Combined with T-19.) Did not discuss at this meeting.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 4/23/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6 of 8   RT21  Elk studies  RT22 RT23  Fluctuation Zone Enhancement Sphagnum Bog Survey  The vegetation sampling seems to be complete. We are waiting for DNR data for mapping. They have developed telemetry data for elk locations. We are working on finishing up the total coverage map and writing up the data. This should be complete by mid June. Ron thinks they are generally on track here. We will go forward with this as part of a PME. AESI set up monitoring devices at different elevations in the WB30 Bog. They have buttoned up with Lauri and Tony on this and are in the process of drafting a bog monitoring plan.  HANDOUTS (Those that will be posted to the website are bolded.) • BAWG Response to Initial Draft Proposed Actions • PDEA Schedule Update • Baker Relicense Study T-12, Update to Study Methods, April 22, 2003 • Common Loon Nesting Platform Design and Placement, Literature Review and Person Interviews, Update April 22, 2003 by Doug Woodworth (Biota Pacific Environmental Sciences, Inc. • Photos taken of amphibian and other habitat in drawdown zones were shared with the group. Will be sent to members in e-mail. PARKING LOT • Conceptual Mitigation Approach (PMEs) • Review time frame/goals of working groups/milestones • Definitions of “project boundary”, “project effects”, “previous environment”, “project area”, NEPA definitions • Watershed Analysis Presentation • Land Management – Do study? • Make list of all available relevant data. Create a subset of those data for Tony to always bring to meetings for group to continually reference. • Are transmission lines in or out of FERC boundary? • Changing Climate Patterns • Determine land management allocations within Project boundary • Interface with Access Management Plan • Come up with optimal reservoir operation scenario(s) from Terrestrial perspective (HYDROPs) • Set up “face to face” meetings with Russ Paul to review our proposals MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones • Laura’s hard work during our meeting. • Thomas’ presence • Lauri getting movement from DNR • BAWG “swan” response to initial draft actions • We have the buckets and the ranges identified! BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 4/23/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 7 of 8   • •  Discussion of procedures Speaker phone  What to Change for Next Time • Missed Stan • Prefer Lauri’s physical presence (but happy she joined us by phone!) WHAT’S HOT? • We have the buckets and the ranges! STUDIES STATUS FOR SOLUTION TEAM • We are ahead of schedule! Tentative Agenda for May 15, 2003 Meeting USFS Office in Mountlake Terrace 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. (Potentially longer, if needed for PME development) Bring a sack lunch and we’ll work through! 1. Introductions 2. Review notes/agenda/action items 3. PDEA update 4. HYDROPS Update 5. Debrief of May 14 workshop 6. Studies update T4, 12, 21 7. Comments on Study Reports: T2, 5, 7b, 16, 17, status of R-T19 (HEP approach) 8. Set agenda for June 19, 2003 9. Evaluate meeting.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 4/23/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 8 of 8    2003terrestrial20030423.pdf en 