BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Working Group November 18, 2003 10:30 a.m. <ad> 4:00 p.m. Baker Lake Lodge Concrete  MEETING NOTES  Mission: "To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process."  Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jessie.piper@pse.com  PRESENT: Jessie Piper and Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Jan Hollenbeck (US Forest Service), Kelly Bush (Equinox Research), Ron Kent (US Army Corps of Engineers), Bob Mierendorf (National Park Service), Chris Miss (Northwest Archaeological Associates), Scott Schuyler by phone (Upper Skagit Tribe), Rob Whitlam by phone (WA Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation), Frank Winchell by phone (FERC), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and Mary Jean Wiltse, notetaker (PDSA Consulting, Inc.)  FUTURE MEETING DATES 2004: Jan. 13, Feb. 10, Mar. 9, Apr. 13, May 11. Jun. 8. All meetings will be at the PSE office in Mt. Vernon unless otherwise specified.  Note: December 9 will be a technical working session with PSE and the Forest Service unless there is substantial TCP-related information to discuss. Jessie will send out a reminder either way during the first week in December.  All regular attendees are encouraged to let Jessie know if they are unable to attend a meeting.  Agenda for November 18, 2003, 10:30-4:00 p.m. Baker Lake Lodge 1. Introductions  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11-18-03 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   2. Review Minutes/Agenda 3. Action Items 4. TST Report 5. Discuss HPMP comments 6. Proposed Actions <b7> Recreation <b7> CRMF 7. Update on TCP studies 8. Review of other studies 9. Set dates for final reports 10. Set Jan. 13, 2004 Agenda 11. Evaluate Meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> Jessie: Talk to new curator (North Cascades National Park) regarding curation possibilities. <b7> Jessie/Jan: Re: Listing process. Discuss meaning of "cooperate" and whether/how to include this in the HPMP. <b7> Jessie: Button up with Russell Holter (OAHP) and Frank (FERC) re: HBS review timeline. <b7> Jessie: On December 2, send out confirmation of December 9 meeting (sufficient TCP-related information to warrant a meeting of the full membership?). <b7> Bob: See if he can get examples of treatment/monitoring plans from Ross Lake to share with Chris. <b7> ALL: Get any additional comments to Kelly re: the ethnographic overview she put together ASAP. <b7> Jessie: Email out the Oct. 27, 2003 PME Status Table to everyone. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Kelly: Gave Swinomish and Sauk-Suiattle Tribes opportunity to clarify their connection to the project (Sec. 3.4) and got that information to Chris by 9/17. <b7> Kelly: Added more detail regarding methods (Sec. 3.4.1) and got information to Chris by 9/17. <b7> Jan: Let Jessie know if USFS would like to propose an enhancement regarding putting the Baker River artifact collections together. Discussions on this are ongoing. <b7> Jessie: Talked to Frank re "listing" versus "eligibility" issues (see notes under HPMP below). <b7> Chris: Incorporated all edits to HPMP for distribution by September 29. TECHNICAL SCENARIO TEAMLET (TST) REPORT Lyn shared the mission and scope of the work being done by the TST with us. They have been meeting twice a month and are processing HYDROPS run requests from the various resource working groups. Paul Wetherbee is the team leader of this teamlet and is available to give us a run-down of their modeling capabilities. Jan informed us that she has been in touch with the Forest Service rep who is a member of the TST re: cultural preferences around reservoir levels. We will get another update at our next meeting in January.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11-18-03 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   HISTORIC PROPERTIES MANAGEMENT PLAN (HPMP) Frank advised us to only include things in this plan that we all fully intend to have carried out in the new license. This can include any measures to offset adverse effects to provisionally eligible properties if the whole group agrees. It can also include an adaptive management component. Comments on the draft of this plan are due January 2, 2004. We need to know if there are any holes that need to be filled. No one could think of anything that was blatantly missing from the plan. Frank feels like we have put together a very comprehensive plan and that these are probably not any "big ticket" items yet to be identified. We discussed how the issues around site stabilization vs. data recovery are still unresolved, as are actions in the TCP arena. Activities around these may translate into "big ticket" items. HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES (HBS) After a recent field trip, we are now thinking of two historic districts instead of three. This means merging the fisheries district with the hydroelectric district. HRA (Lisa Mighetto) is revising this report accordingly. The bulk of the revisions to the report will be in Chapters 4 and 5. We hope this report will be out in early January. Folks will only have about two weeks to review it for final comments. All comments on eligibility recommendations will be sent to SHPO for concurrence so the appropriate resources can be included in the HPMP. UPDATE ON TRADITIONAL CULTURAL PROPERTY (TCP) STUDIES Kelly reported that a Request for Proposal (RFP) was issued to the three Tribes a year ago re: TCP studies. The Upper Skagit Tribe responded first, identifying some critical areas. They will talk with Jessie in December re: project effects. All Tribes know that December 1st is the deadline for TCP identification for eligibility. They are also reviewing the ethnographic overview that Kelly put together. The Sauk-Suiattle has also responded to the RFP. Kelly has recently begun discussions with them re: their oral history study (expected to be complete in December 2004). The Swinomish Tribe has not yet responded to the RFP. Kelly has also ensured that the Tribes are all aware of the archaeological sites we have identified to date. There may be overlap with TCPs. ARCHAEOLOGY REPORT Chris informed us that this report is out and comments are expected by December 2. Jan reported she will be unable to provide her comments until after January 2. It is particularly important to get DOE related comments as soon as possible. Chris will incorporate all comments into a final report by the end of January.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11-18-03 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   NOTE: Feel free to get your comments to Chris sooner than December 2, if possible.  Frank says we can turn in the final HPMP along with the license application to FERC on April 30, 2004. At that point, Frank will send out the PA (Programmatic Agreement).  RECREATION PROPOSED ACTIONS Jessie and Kelly went on a field trip with Andy Hatfield (Team Leader of the Recreation/Aesthetics Working Group). He showed them a proposed walking area (trail) at Panorama Point. Kelly has discussed this with Scott Schuyler to see if there are cultural concerns with this area. The recreation folks are also planning some developments at Bayview North, Bayview South, and Horseshoe Cove. Andy showed Kelly and Jessie what was being considered there.  We would want to officially support any recreation developments that would steer folks away from culturally sensitive areas. In some of the development areas, there may also be opportunities for culturally interactive markers.  Side stabilization might be another response to mitigating project effects, as would data recovery, vegetative plantings etc.  We should be prepared to address in the HPMP any PMEs that are fairly well fleshed out and that are scheduled for action within the first five years after the license is issued. This might most easily be accomplished through a mapping exercise. Jessie and Jan will continue to be our liaisons with the Recreation Working Group.  PME's that will be implemented after the first five years will be reviewed through the process outlined in the HPMP for reviewing new developments.  We will spend time discussing this at our January and February Working Group meetings. Jessie will get updated PME information from the team leaders of the other resource working groups.  2004 ACTION PLAN In 2004 we will need to begin drafting the Archaeology Monitoring Plan and Site Treatment Plan. We will also need to begin work on the Maintenance Guidelines for Historic Buildings & Structures.  We will need to determine what elements are included in the Site Treatment Plan and get more information on site stabilization. Bob will see what he can come up with in terms of examples of archaeological treatment and monitoring plans from Ross Lake.  HANDOUTS <b7> Schedule for Implementing Management Measures (from HPMP) <b7> PME Status Table as of October 27, 2003  PARKING LOT <b7> Glossary of terms: what are "protection," "mitigation," and "enhancement"? BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11-18-03 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   <b7> Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? <b7> Possibility of transplanting young cedar trees/Availability of downed cedar for tribal use <b7> HYDROPS demo <b7> How to handle timing/schedule for implementing HPMP MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones <b7> Great Thanksgiving meal! <b7> Nice location <b7> Got out early <b7> Good participation <b7> Happy that Ron is now a member of our Group! <b7> Kelly's s'mores and holiday wreaths. Thanks Kelly! Changes for Next Time <b7> Missed Tribal participation (though we appreciated Scott joining us on the phone when he was able) What's Hot? <b7> Getting updated PME information from other resource groups in a timely manner (their potential effects on historic properties). Studies Status for Solution Team <b7> Archaeology: Draft report is out. Final comments are due Dec. 2. <b7> Historic Buildings and Structures: Revised report will be out Jan 12. <b7> Traditional Cultural Properties" Dec. 1 is eligibility deadline. <b7> Upper Skagits are completing their short-term study. <b7> Sauk-Suiattles are in negotiations on their proposal. TENTATIVE Agenda for January 13, 2004, 10:00-4:00 p.m. PSE Office Building, Mt. Vernon, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review November 18, 2003 Notes and Agenda 3. Action Items 4. TST Report 5. HPMP comments/update 6. Update on TCP studies 7. Review of other studies: Archaeology Report, HBS (Revised Report) 8. Begin PME review/mapping exercise (include in HPMP those that will include ground disturbing within first 5 years of license). 9. Set Agenda for February 11 meeting 10. Evaluate Meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 11-18-03 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5    2003cultural20031118.pdf en 