BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Solution Team February 25, 2003 9:00 a.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. US Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 AGENDA 1. Introductions 2. Settlement Process Update <ad> Cross Resource Workshop 3. Preparation for FERC call/ FERC call <b7> Flood Control Update 4. Action Items <b7> PDEA Update <b7> HYDROPS Update 5. Working Groups: <b7> What's Hot? <b7> Status of Studies in Working Groups 6. Schedules/Timelines 7. Other? 8. Set March 25, 2003 Agenda and Evaluate Meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Solution Team February 25, 2003 9:00 a.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. U.S. Forest Service Building Mountlake Terrace, WA  Mission: By April 30, 2004, the Baker Solution Team will draft a settlement agreement for relicensing of the Baker River Project that best meets the interests of the signatories. FINAL MEETING NOTES Note: Call Connie at 425-462-3556 if unable to attend the meeting so she can plan for lunches. Call Lyn's cell phone 425-890-3613 if something comes up at the last minute (on the way to the meeting). Conference Call Number: This is a toll-free call. The procedure is: <b7> Dial 1-866-280-6429 at the designated date and time. <b7> Enter the Participant code of 144995 followed by the # sign. <b7> You will be asked to record your name. <b7> You will hear hold music until the Host has dialed into the call. Team Leader: Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy) 425-462-3556, connie.freeland@pse.com Members Present: Steve Hocking, Keith Brooks (FERC, by phone), Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group), Rob Mohn (the Louis Berger Group), Jerry Louthain (Economic and Engineering Services, for Anacortes, Skagit P.U.D. and Town of Concrete), Marian Valentine (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers), Steve Fransen (NMFS), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Bob Helton (Citizen), Bob Nelson (Rocky Mt. Elk Foundation), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Steve Jennison (DNR), Gary Sprague (WDFW, by phone), Jon Vanderheyden and Rod Mace (U.S. Forest Service), Rod Sakrison (WA DOE), Ed Schild, Kris Olin, Connie Freeland, Joel Molander by phone, and Lloyd Pernela by phone (PSE), Dave Brookings (Skagit County Public Works, by phone), Bruce Freet (Environmental Agreements), Dee Endelman and Eli Asher (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse, Facilitator and Mary Jean Bullock, Note-Taker (PDSA Consulting, Inc.).  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   2003 Solution Team Meeting Schedule March 25, April 22, May 20*, June 24, July 22, August 26, September 23, October 28, November 25, December 16*. [* 3rd Tuesday because of holidays.] PME Cross Resource Workshop Schedule March 4 (1-5 p.m. only), 5 and 6 at the CottonTree Inn at Mt. Vernon, from 8 a.m. to 4:30 or 5 p.m. on both days. AGENDA February 25, 2003 at USFS Office Building in Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. 1. Introductions 2. Settlement Process Update <b7> Cross-Resource Workshop Update <b7> Draft Proposed Actions 3. Preparation for FERC call/ FERC call <b7> Workshop Update <b7> Flood Control Update 4. Action Items <b7> PDEA Update <b7> HYDROPS Update 5. Working Groups: <b7> What's Hot? <b7> Status of Studies in Working Groups 6. Schedules/Timelines 7. Other? 8. Set March 25, 2003 Agenda and Evaluate Meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Give feedback on Settlement Process to Bruce, Dee, or Lyn. <b7> Marian: Get clarification from Wayne Wagner re: flexibility in timing of flood control drawdown. <b7> Steve H: Meet with Steve Fransen and Rob Mohn to discuss how to integrate ESA into PDEA. <b7> Steve F: Button up with Gene Stagner by March 3 re: ESA requirements for PDEA. <b7> Kris: Post the Flow Chart Versions of the Relicensing Schedule on the website. <b7> Lloyd: Convene meeting of Economics/Operations teamlet to discuss Keith Brook's flood storage working paper. <b7> Connie: Add Communication Protocol and Process Document to PSE website. Ask Kristen to post schedule information independently from Working Group-specific information. <b7> Lyn: Add telephone etiquette to meeting norms. SETTLEMENT PROCESS UPDATE As a result of the cross-resource workshop, we hope to move from first draft PMEs to second draft PMEs.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   The Facilitator Team suggests the Solution Team review what comes out of the workshop in the form of technical Working Groups by resource area. We will ensure that all resource areas are adequately covered. As needed, the Baker Solution Technical Working Groups would confer with resource area Working Groups for technical advice/support. Concern was expressed about the schedule. Many felt it was premature to try to work on the second draft PMEs with many studies still outstanding and some "un-drafted" PMEs. There were also questions about the timing of starting up some Baker Solution Team technical Working Groups when the regular Working Groups are still working through major issues. We will see what emerges from the workshop and then discuss the settlement process again at our March 25 meeting. CROSS-RESOURCE WORKSHOP People seem to be looking forward to the 2 <bd> days. Workshop packets, complete with agendas, have been emailed out. There were no questions re: the format or substance of the workshop. PSE's DRAFT PROPOSED ACTIONS After some discussions, where fears were expressed that the Solution Team's request of PSE to come up with a straw man to help move the process forward might actually serve to move the process backward since it doesn't appear to be collaborative, we decided that any movement was good. Ed distributed PSE's attempt at a precursor to the second draft PMEs. Hard copies were distributed to those present and will be mailed to absent Solution Team members. Electronic versions (pdf format) will be sent to all Working Group members with an explanatory note. Ed's cover letter will remain attached when it is distributed to non-Solution Team members (Working Group members). We will discuss the draft proposed actions at the March workshop. QUESTIONS FOR FERC <b7> Absent in-stream flow data, might FERC give us an extension? <b7> Flood Control <ad> What's the process? FERC CONFERENCE CALL License Extension? No extension can be given, and PSE must file its license application on the due date (April 30, 2004). Any "holes" must be handled through Adaptive Management and/or possibly additional studies. FERC might also issue a Notice of Acceptance and ask for additional information, giving us the summer of 2004 for additional studies. FERC prefers Adaptive Management over additional studies after the application is filed. Crafting Adaptive Management language could allow us to still come up with a Settlement Agreement.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   Flood Control In the Economics/Operations Working Group, members have accepted the Corp's flood control requirements as baseline conditions. Dave Brookings announced that Skagit County will be meeting February 26 with PSE and the USACE to discuss study needs around flood control, possibly including a cost sharing agreement. Any change in the volume of the current flood control regime would require approval by Congress. Marian expects that the Corps will ask that the flood control volume (up to 100,000 acre-feet in the current Article 32) remain in the new license. The Corps currently uses 74,000 acre-feet. The federal government reimburses PSE for 58,000 acre-feet. That reimbursement was the result of Congressional action, so any change in that would require approval by Congress. However, within the FERC licensing process, there might be decision space to increase that volume without reimbursement for the additional flood control storage space.  There might be some flexibility in the timing of the draw down. There was not consensus on this. Marian will follow up with Wayne Wagner to try to get clarification.  We agreed to let the Economics/Operations Working Group continue to wrestle with this issue. We will get a report from them at our March 25 meeting.  Scoping Document 2 Steve H. has sent a draft scoping Document 2 to Connie and Rob for review. He will integrate their comments and get the revised draft out for broader review by March 14.  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Keith prepared a working paper on flood storage in lieu of convening a teamlet. <b7> All let Keith know if they'd like to participate in the flood control teamlet meeting. <b7> All checked with respective organizations re: single NEPA process. <b7> Steve H. called Steve F. and Rob re: how PDEA can satisfy NMFS requirements (BA). <b7> Steve H. finished up a draft Scoping Document 2 and sent to Connie and Rob for review prior to sending out for Solution Team review. <b7> Steve H. touched base with Kris and Rob re: schedule. <b7> Kris posted the SureTrak Relicensing Schedule on the website. <b7> Bob H. did a great job categorizing our list of meeting norm items for our review. Thanks Bob! PDEA Update May 1st is the date for the first preliminary draft. It will be a snapshot of work in progress. It will include affected environment and be light in many areas absent studies. The Louis Berger Group will be seeking feedback re: tone/organization of this initial draft. Next steps: Get guidance from the Solution Team by June 1st as to what should be used in the PDEA as a preferred alternative. For the September draft, we will need to include costs (lost power output and economic outlays). We will be looking to the Working Groups for help with estimating these costs.  After the September PDEA, there will be a call for preliminary terms and conditions from the agencies.  There seems to be good cooperation among Louis Berger team members and Working Group members.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   HYDROPS Update Jon distributed a list of specifications used by USFS and Stetson re: critical pieces to have in the evaluation model. They have had discussions re: model requirements across various stakeholder groups. A number of the responses in the right hand column involve modifications PSE is working with Powel to incorporate into the HYDROPS model.  "Model" refers to HYDROPS plus R-2's Habitat Model. Connections between these two models are critical, because resource effects need to be considered along with economic effects. (The R-2 model needs instream flow data to be complete). There is also streamlining going on to make hard and soft constraints flow more fluidly.  The system is also being modified to accommodate multi-year runs. Next step: Final evaluation will happen after modifications to the model have been completed (hoping for end of March).  Powel is entering into an agreement with Stetson that will allow Stetson to have a copy of the model on one of Powel's desk top computers (to be housed at Stetson).  WHAT'S HOT IN THE WORKING GROUPS? Cultural <b7> Workshop Preparation (PMEs) <b7> Access  Economics <b7> Flood control/management <b7> Model results <b7> Low Flow "thang"  Aquatics <b7> Need for substantive discussion re: PMEs <b7> Need to prioritize study review/rest of work load  Terrestrial <b7> Frogs and bogs... actually bogs are only luke warm <b7> Concern with straw man at workshop (participants didn't create it)  Recreation <b7> Land ownership <b7> Cross Resource Workshop <b7> Study results <b7> New study requests "yet to be proposed" may not be well received by PSE STUDIES UPDATE FOR SOLUTION TEAM Cultural <b7> TCPs rolling along <ad> research designs by April <b7> Archaeology field work finishing by end of February BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5   <b7> Historic building inventory complete <b7> Report out and presentation March/April in Concrete Economics <b7> R-01 <ad> Low Flow Augmentation from Baker Project <ad> Continuing discussion <b7> R-02 <ad> Evaluation of Optimal Flood Control Storage in Upper Baker Reservoir <ad> Moving from Study Request to Study Plan <b7> R-03 <ad> Examination of Spawning and Incubation Flows in the Skagit River below the Baker Confluence during brood year 2000 <ad> Tabled for discussion in March Aquatics <b7> Got 8 out of 24 transects done (instream flows) <b7> A1 <ad> Tributary reports almost out <b7> A37 <ad> Increased awareness of importance <ad> this will tie to A17 Terrestrial <b7> Amphibian Study (considering next steps) <b7> Bogs <ad> Made good progress (Study Plan to be developed) <b7> Grizzly Bears <ad> Study Plan is underway <b7> Elk <ad> Study Plan is underway Recreation <b7> Most study results due out in February are now due out in March SCHEDULES/TIMELINES Kris distributed an updated version of the SureTrak schedule. The updated flow diagram will be sent out February 25. It will also be posted to the website. (Sent out with draft minutes <ad> Team Leader note). In reviewing the overall schedule, between now and April 30, 2004, the timeline for license application, PDEA, and Settlement Agreement are all on the critical path. MEETING NOTES PROTOCOL We reminded everyone of the protocol we have re: Working Group minutes. The initial draft notes will essentially be what comes from the facilitator (grammatical and other small, non-substantive edits from team leaders are fine). The exception would be where team leaders were expressly asked by Working Group members to fill in some technical details. Any substantive edits to that first draft from team leader/others will be italicized in the second draft. PARKING LOT <b7> Members need to describe their roles in terms of decision-making authority in their organizations (this relates to who would be members of the Policy Solution Team). <b7> Define a process for delayed resolution (based on incomplete studies). <b7> Adaptive management:  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6   <b7> How can we take into account future technology, knowledge, conditions, resources, weather (global warming), etc.? <b7> How can we balance licensee exposure? <b7> How to enlist recreational users. <b7> Define "project induced." (Teamlet?) <b7> Develop public information protocol. <b7> Summary Record of Decisions. <b7> PMEs listed for each Working Group.  HANDOUTS <b7> Draft Proposed Actions For Baker River Project <ad> February 24, 2003 (with cover memo) [Paper and electronic copies sent to all Solution Team members <ad> Team Leader note.] <b7> Cross Resource Workshop <ad> Key Conflicts, Key Synergies, Shared Interests/Concerns <ad> The Facilitation Team 2/24/2003 <b7> Baker Relicensing Project, Method for Reaching Agreement <ad> Draft February 2003 <b7> Baker Relicensing Project, Draft Timeline for Reaching Agreement: March 2003-October 2003 <b7> Specification for Operations Model to be Used in Baker Project Relicensing and Current Capability of HYDROPS to Meet the Specification (Revised by Stetson on January 13, 2003; Comments by PSE/Powel on January 24, 2003) <b7> SureTrak Schedule for Baker Relicensing, February 24, 2003  March 25, 2003 at USFS Office Building in Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. 1. Introductions 2. Settlement Process Update <ad> Cross Resource Workshop Workshop debrief Next Steps 3. Preparation for FERC call/ FERC call <b7> Flood Control Update 4. Action Items <b7> PDEA Update <b7> HYDROPS Update 5. Working Groups: <b7> What's Hot? <b7> Status of Studies in Working Groups 6. Schedules/Timelines 7. Other? 8. Set April 22, 2003 Agenda and Evaluate Meeting MEETING EVALUATION Done Well <b7> Got out early <b7> Phone participation was good <b7> PSE took the bold step/daring leap of distributing draft proposed actions  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 7   <b7> Good analogies (in Cary's absence) Do Differently Next Time <b7> Missed Cary, Bill <b7> Coffee was late <ad> it would be nice if it arrived by 8:45 a.m. <b7> Lunchtime "rustling" of paper bags made it hard for phone folks to hear us <b7> We need to mind phone etiquette  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 8   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Solution Team February 25, 2003 9:00 a.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. U.S. Forest Service Building Mountlake Terrace, WA  Mission: By April 30, 2004, the Baker Solution Team will draft a settlement agreement for relicensing of the Baker River Project that best meets the interests of the signatories. FINAL MEETING NOTES Note: Call Connie at 425-462-3556 if unable to attend the meeting so she can plan for lunches. Call Lyn's cell phone 425-890-3613 if something comes up at the last minute (on the way to the meeting). Conference Call Number: This is a toll-free call. The procedure is: <b7> Dial 1-866-280-6429 at the designated date and time. <b7> Enter the Participant code of 144995 followed by the # sign. <b7> You will be asked to record your name. <b7> You will hear hold music until the Host has dialed into the call. Team Leader: Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy) 425-462-3556, connie.freeland@pse.com Members Present: Steve Hocking, Keith Brooks (FERC, by phone), Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group), Rob Mohn (the Louis Berger Group), Jerry Louthain (Economic and Engineering Services, for Anacortes, Skagit P.U.D. and Town of Concrete), Marian Valentine (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers), Steve Fransen (NMFS), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Bob Helton (Citizen), Bob Nelson (Rocky Mt. Elk Foundation), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Steve Jennison (DNR), Gary Sprague (WDFW, by phone), Jon Vanderheyden and Rod Mace (U.S. Forest Service), Rod Sakrison (WA DOE), Ed Schild, Kris Olin, Connie Freeland, Joel Molander by phone, and Lloyd Pernela by phone (PSE), Dave Brookings (Skagit County Public Works, by phone), Bruce Freet (Environmental Agreements), Dee Endelman and Eli Asher (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse, Facilitator and Mary Jean Bullock, Note-Taker (PDSA Consulting, Inc.).  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   2003 Solution Team Meeting Schedule March 25, April 22, May 20*, June 24, July 22, August 26, September 23, October 28, November 25, December 16*. [* 3rd Tuesday because of holidays.] PME Cross Resource Workshop Schedule March 4 (1-5 p.m. only), 5 and 6 at the CottonTree Inn at Mt. Vernon, from 8 a.m. to 4:30 or 5 p.m. on both days. AGENDA February 25, 2003 at USFS Office Building in Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. 1. Introductions 2. Settlement Process Update <b7> Cross-Resource Workshop Update <b7> Draft Proposed Actions 3. Preparation for FERC call/ FERC call <b7> Workshop Update <b7> Flood Control Update 4. Action Items <b7> PDEA Update <b7> HYDROPS Update 5. Working Groups: <b7> What's Hot? <b7> Status of Studies in Working Groups 6. Schedules/Timelines 7. Other? 8. Set March 25, 2003 Agenda and Evaluate Meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Give feedback on Settlement Process to Bruce, Dee, or Lyn. <b7> Marian: Get clarification from Wayne Wagner re: flexibility in timing of flood control drawdown. <b7> Steve H: Meet with Steve Fransen and Rob Mohn to discuss how to integrate ESA into PDEA. <b7> Steve F: Button up with Gene Stagner by March 3 re: ESA requirements for PDEA. <b7> Kris: Post the Flow Chart Versions of the Relicensing Schedule on the website. <b7> Lloyd: Convene meeting of Economics/Operations teamlet to discuss Keith Brook's flood storage working paper. <b7> Connie: Add Communication Protocol and Process Document to PSE website. Ask Kristen to post schedule information independently from Working Group-specific information. <b7> Lyn: Add telephone etiquette to meeting norms. SETTLEMENT PROCESS UPDATE As a result of the cross-resource workshop, we hope to move from first draft PMEs to second draft PMEs.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   The Facilitator Team suggests the Solution Team review what comes out of the workshop in the form of technical Working Groups by resource area. We will ensure that all resource areas are adequately covered. As needed, the Baker Solution Technical Working Groups would confer with resource area Working Groups for technical advice/support. Concern was expressed about the schedule. Many felt it was premature to try to work on the second draft PMEs with many studies still outstanding and some "un-drafted" PMEs. There were also questions about the timing of starting up some Baker Solution Team technical Working Groups when the regular Working Groups are still working through major issues. We will see what emerges from the workshop and then discuss the settlement process again at our March 25 meeting. CROSS-RESOURCE WORKSHOP People seem to be looking forward to the 2 <bd> days. Workshop packets, complete with agendas, have been emailed out. There were no questions re: the format or substance of the workshop. PSE's DRAFT PROPOSED ACTIONS After some discussions, where fears were expressed that the Solution Team's request of PSE to come up with a straw man to help move the process forward might actually serve to move the process backward since it doesn't appear to be collaborative, we decided that any movement was good. Ed distributed PSE's attempt at a precursor to the second draft PMEs. Hard copies were distributed to those present and will be mailed to absent Solution Team members. Electronic versions (pdf format) will be sent to all Working Group members with an explanatory note. Ed's cover letter will remain attached when it is distributed to non-Solution Team members (Working Group members). We will discuss the draft proposed actions at the March workshop. QUESTIONS FOR FERC <b7> Absent in-stream flow data, might FERC give us an extension? <b7> Flood Control <ad> What's the process? FERC CONFERENCE CALL License Extension? No extension can be given, and PSE must file its license application on the due date (April 30, 2004). Any "holes" must be handled through Adaptive Management and/or possibly additional studies. FERC might also issue a Notice of Acceptance and ask for additional information, giving us the summer of 2004 for additional studies. FERC prefers Adaptive Management over additional studies after the application is filed. Crafting Adaptive Management language could allow us to still come up with a Settlement Agreement.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   Flood Control In the Economics/Operations Working Group, members have accepted the Corp's flood control requirements as baseline conditions. Dave Brookings announced that Skagit County will be meeting February 26 with PSE and the USACE to discuss study needs around flood control, possibly including a cost sharing agreement. Any change in the volume of the current flood control regime would require approval by Congress. Marian expects that the Corps will ask that the flood control volume (up to 100,000 acre-feet in the current Article 32) remain in the new license. The Corps currently uses 74,000 acre-feet. The federal government reimburses PSE for 58,000 acre-feet. That reimbursement was the result of Congressional action, so any change in that would require approval by Congress. However, within the FERC licensing process, there might be decision space to increase that volume without reimbursement for the additional flood control storage space.  There might be some flexibility in the timing of the draw down. There was not consensus on this. Marian will follow up with Wayne Wagner to try to get clarification.  We agreed to let the Economics/Operations Working Group continue to wrestle with this issue. We will get a report from them at our March 25 meeting.  Scoping Document 2 Steve H. has sent a draft scoping Document 2 to Connie and Rob for review. He will integrate their comments and get the revised draft out for broader review by March 14.  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Keith prepared a working paper on flood storage in lieu of convening a teamlet. <b7> All let Keith know if they'd like to participate in the flood control teamlet meeting. <b7> All checked with respective organizations re: single NEPA process. <b7> Steve H. called Steve F. and Rob re: how PDEA can satisfy NMFS requirements (BA). <b7> Steve H. finished up a draft Scoping Document 2 and sent to Connie and Rob for review prior to sending out for Solution Team review. <b7> Steve H. touched base with Kris and Rob re: schedule. <b7> Kris posted the SureTrak Relicensing Schedule on the website. <b7> Bob H. did a great job categorizing our list of meeting norm items for our review. Thanks Bob! PDEA Update May 1st is the date for the first preliminary draft. It will be a snapshot of work in progress. It will include affected environment and be light in many areas absent studies. The Louis Berger Group will be seeking feedback re: tone/organization of this initial draft.  Next steps: Get guidance from the Solution Team by June 1st as to what should be used in the PDEA as a preferred alternative. For the September draft, we will need to include costs (lost power output and economic outlays). We will be looking to the Working Groups for help with estimating these costs.  After the September PDEA, there will be a call for preliminary terms and conditions from the agencies.  There seems to be good cooperation among Louis Berger team members and Working Group members.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   HYDROPS Update Jon distributed a list of specifications used by USFS and Stetson re: critical pieces to have in the evaluation model. They have had discussions re: model requirements across various stakeholder groups. A number of the responses in the right hand column involve modifications PSE is working with Powel to incorporate into the HYDROPS model.  "Model" refers to HYDROPS plus R-2's Habitat Model. Connections between these two models are critical, because resource effects need to be considered along with economic effects. (The R-2 model needs instream flow data to be complete). There is also streamlining going on to make hard and soft constraints flow more fluidly.  The system is also being modified to accommodate multi-year runs. Next step: Final evaluation will happen after modifications to the model have been completed (hoping for end of March).  Powel is entering into an agreement with Stetson that will allow Stetson to have a copy of the model on one of Powel's desk top computers (to be housed at Stetson).  WHAT'S HOT IN THE WORKING GROUPS? Cultural <b7> Workshop Preparation (PMEs) <b7> Access  Economics <b7> Flood control/management <b7> Model results <b7> Low Flow "thang"  Aquatics <b7> Need for substantive discussion re: PMEs <b7> Need to prioritize study review/rest of work load  Terrestrial <b7> Frogs and bogs... actually bogs are only luke warm <b7> Concern with straw man at workshop (participants didn't create it)  Recreation <b7> Land ownership <b7> Cross Resource Workshop <b7> Study results <b7> New study requests "yet to be proposed" may not be well received by PSE STUDIES UPDATE FOR SOLUTION TEAM Cultural <b7> TCPs rolling along <ad> research designs by April <b7> Archaeology field work finishing by end of February BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5   <b7> Historic building inventory complete <b7> Report out and presentation March/April in Concrete Economics <b7> R-01 <ad> Low Flow Augmentation from Baker Project <ad> Continuing discussion <b7> R-02 <ad> Evaluation of Optimal Flood Control Storage in Upper Baker Reservoir <ad> Moving from Study Request to Study Plan <b7> R-03 <ad> Examination of Spawning and Incubation Flows in the Skagit River below the Baker Confluence during brood year 2000 <ad> Tabled for discussion in March Aquatics <b7> Got 8 out of 24 transects done (instream flows) <b7> A1 <ad> Tributary reports almost out <b7> A37 <ad> Increased awareness of importance <ad> this will tie to A17 Terrestrial <b7> Amphibian Study (considering next steps) <b7> Bogs <ad> Made good progress (Study Plan to be developed) <b7> Grizzly Bears <ad> Study Plan is underway <b7> Elk <ad> Study Plan is underway Recreation <b7> Most study results due out in February are now due out in March SCHEDULES/TIMELINES Kris distributed an updated version of the SureTrak schedule. The updated flow diagram will be sent out February 25. It will also be posted to the website. (Sent out with draft minutes <ad> Team Leader note). In reviewing the overall schedule, between now and April 30, 2004, the timeline for license application, PDEA, and Settlement Agreement are all on the critical path. MEETING NOTES PROTOCOL We reminded everyone of the protocol we have re: Working Group minutes. The initial draft notes will essentially be what comes from the facilitator (grammatical and other small, non-substantive edits from team leaders are fine). The exception would be where team leaders were expressly asked by Working Group members to fill in some technical details. Any substantive edits to that first draft from team leader/others will be italicized in the second draft. PARKING LOT <b7> Members need to describe their roles in terms of decision-making authority in their organizations (this relates to who would be members of the Policy Solution Team). <b7> Define a process for delayed resolution (based on incomplete studies). <b7> Adaptive management:  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6   <b7> How can we take into account future technology, knowledge, conditions, resources, weather (global warming), etc.? <b7> How can we balance licensee exposure? <b7> How to enlist recreational users. <b7> Define "project induced." (Teamlet?) <b7> Develop public information protocol. <b7> Summary Record of Decisions. <b7> PMEs listed for each Working Group.  HANDOUTS <b7> Draft Proposed Actions For Baker River Project <ad> February 24, 2003 (with cover memo) [Paper and electronic copies sent to all Solution Team members <ad> Team Leader note.] <b7> Cross Resource Workshop <ad> Key Conflicts, Key Synergies, Shared Interests/Concerns <ad> The Facilitation Team 2/24/2003 <b7> Baker Relicensing Project, Method for Reaching Agreement <ad> Draft February 2003 <b7> Baker Relicensing Project, Draft Timeline for Reaching Agreement: March 2003-October 2003 <b7> Specification for Operations Model to be Used in Baker Project Relicensing and Current Capability of HYDROPS to Meet the Specification (Revised by Stetson on January 13, 2003; Comments by PSE/Powel on January 24, 2003) <b7> SureTrak Schedule for Baker Relicensing, February 24, 2003  March 25, 2003 at USFS Office Building in Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. 1. Introductions 2. Settlement Process Update <ad> Cross Resource Workshop Workshop debrief Next Steps 3. Preparation for FERC call/ FERC call <b7> Flood Control Update 4. Action Items <b7> PDEA Update <b7> HYDROPS Update 5. Working Groups: <b7> What's Hot? <b7> Status of Studies in Working Groups 6. Schedules/Timelines 7. Other? 8. Set April 22, 2003 Agenda and Evaluate Meeting MEETING EVALUATION Done Well <b7> Got out early <b7> Phone participation was good <b7> PSE took the bold step/daring leap of distributing draft proposed actions  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 7   <b7> Good analogies (in Cary's absence) Do Differently Next Time <b7> Missed Cary, Bill <b7> Coffee was late <ad> it would be nice if it arrived by 8:45 a.m. <b7> Lunchtime "rustling" of paper bags made it hard for phone folks to hear us <b7> We need to mind phone etiquette  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/25/2003 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team-Lyn Wiltse, PDSA Consulting, Inc. Facilitator FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 8    2003solution20030225.pdf en 