 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group May 19th, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 21905 64th Ave. West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 AGENDA 1. How to RESOLVE issues 2. Discussion of the Aesthetics Study (Debrief of teamlet) 3. Study status R9, R12, R16, R11/15 4. Debrief of May 14th Cross Resource Workshop 5. Hydrops run update BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group May 19, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace WA 98273 FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 853- 8341. PRESENT Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council ), Brian Adams (Skagit County), Andy Hatfield (PSE), Susan Rosenbrough (National Parks), Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), facilitator and Dawn Schink, notetaker (PSE). 2003 SCHEDULE Jun 16 (RESOLVE 9am-3pm, PSE Mt. Vernon), Jun 23, July 21 (RESOLVE 9am-3pm), Jul 28, Aug 11 (RESOLVE 9am-3pm), Aug. 25, Sept.22. Oct 27, Nov.17 (third Monday), December 15 (third Monday). Assume Forest Service Office in Mountlake Terrace from 9:00 to 2:30 unless otherwise specified. CONFERENCE CALL LINE: ALL WERE REMINDED, ESPECIALLY DURING THESE WINTER MONTHS, THAT THE CONFERENCE CALL LINE WILL BE OPEN DURING ALL THESE MEETINGS. PLEASE CALL 1-866-280-6429 AND ENTER PARTICIPANT CODE: 144995 #. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group May 19, 2003 Agenda • Review notes/agenda • Action items • Debrief May 14th Cross Resource Workshop • How to RESOLVE issues • Discussions of Aesthetics study (debrief of teamlet) • Study Status • R9 • R12 • R16 • R11/15 7. Hydrops 8. Agenda for June 16 for Recreation Resolve 9am to 3pm & June 23, 2003 9. Evaluate meeting New Actions Items • Andy: send out cultural flow charts to group by • Andy: Discuss dispersed recreation attributes with team leads on May 23 & then cross resource working group. • Andy: send Ann power point handouts from 5/14 workshop. • Andy: see if Mount Vernon available for June Resolve session. • Andy: Review aesthetic study examples given by Ann. • Andy, Ann, Brian: meet to hammer out a study plan using ideas from today's meeting, by June 20th. • Andy: revised study plan for the meeting above by June 6th. • Ann: Get USFS input on current study plan by Friday May 23rd. Report on Old Actions Items • Ann: Check with Jim Kneeland (Lewis River settlement) re: criteria used in that settlement on dispersed camping sites. • Andy & Dee: Set up way to have dispersed site cross resource discussion at 5/14 workshop. • Chris: Use information to refine R12 data. • Andy: Call Saul Weisberg re: 6.5 of Proposed draft action. DISPERSED RECREATION: Patrick presented suggested wording to PME 2.2.2. The wording discusses the possibility - in future - of having to manage project related dispersed sites if they have impact on specific surrounding wilderness areas. Dee suggested this be included in PME RESOLVE discussions over the coming months. DEBRIEF OF MAY 14 WORKSHOP Andy reviewed what happened at the 5/14 Cross Resource Workshop. He gave out the PDEA feedback given by the Berger group at that workshop. We agreed that we would not be able to provide additional detail before June 1, 2003. We agreed, however, that we would get started on RESOLVE discussions. Dee presented a draft process for settlement that's being worked on by Solution Team. People raised Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group questions about the Policy Team. All agreed that we'd like to come to as much agreement as possible within the working group & at the Solution Team level. We agreed to hold RESOLVE discussions on the following days: (9am - 3pm) June 16 (Mt. Vernon) July 21 (Mountlake Terrace) August 11 (Mountlake Terrace) For the June 16 RESOLVE meeting, we put the following topics on the agenda: 2.1.1 Water Safety 2.1.2 Boating hazards 2.4.1 Create new trails 2.5.4 Kulshan 2.5.7 ADA compliance AESTHETICS STUDY (TEAMLET REPORT) Andy reported on teamlet meeting to select photos for Focus Group sessions. The teamlet, instead, had discussion about expansion of study scope, to include not only VQO (Visual Quality Objectives) but also SMS (Scenery Management System) method of USFS, and to expand geographical area of study. They did not reach a conclusion. Ann explained what SMS is and why it's important to USFS. In Forest Service philosophy, historically, they hadn't looked at ecological impacts. Now they do. Not only does something need to look appropriate, it needs to be ecologically sound. Things also need to feel appropriate in cultural/social context. PSE Interests • Need to get study done this summer. • Study needs to draw light over the area of project effect, as opposed to a broader view. • Cost of study needs to be reasonable. • Study results do not create expectations that PSE will “mitigate the world” Forest Service Interests • Use SMS as part of study based on USFS policy. • Want study right sized to scope. • Results should be useful to guide other PME's (e.g. lake levels, vegetation. management, etc.) Skagit County Interests • Shannon Lake area is covered. • Whatever is done will blend with environment. • Ecologically sound. How can we design & implement a study that respects all interests? • Find out how much more money it will cost. • Conduct high level study now & expand on it later. • Do Phase I now to satisfy FERC but in a way that will be useful at next step. • Project effects, operations in terms of VQO. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group STUDY UPDATE: We discussed how to best review and provide feedback on studies. We decided to review and discuss at next meeting: R11/15 R12: SITE INVENTORY In July, we would look at R16. PARKING LOT • Presentation of National Forest Plan • Land Management • Forest Service presentation of SMS • Hold periodic "outreach" meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) • Field trip - summer 2003? • Review USFS Roads Analysis Report - 2003 EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well • Dee helped get us through lots • Good facilitation around RESOLVE "mini-session" Need for Improvement • Missed Jim and Saul What's hot? • Aesthetics study scope • O & M costs TENTATIVE AGENDA June 23, 2003 Agenda - USGFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 9:00am to 2:30pm NOTE: BRING LUNCH: BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH • Review notes/agenda/action items • Review studies in detail: • R 11/15 • R 12 • HYDROPS update Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  