BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group Meeting February 20th, 2003 (8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m.) (Bring Sack Lunch) PSE Mount Vernon Business Office conference room 1700 E. College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 Conference Call Line: 1-866-280-6429, code 144995# (Please tell Tony or Lyn (425-890-3613) if you plan to call into meeting)  AGENDA Review notes/revise agenda/action items Studies Reports • Do vegetation first! Assess sufficiency of data • What conclusions can we draw? • Analysis methods? • What additional data needs? • How might we collect it? • What additional analysis needs? • PME refinement (as next step) Confirm March 20th location and agenda, meeting location/dates for April, May Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group February 20, 2003 8:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. PSE Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA  FINAL MEETING MINUTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations, addressing terrestrial and wildlife resource interests for the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement that: • accurately defines and describes the existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; • identifies project effects (existing and proposed) leading to development of protection, mitigation, and enhancement options.” Team Leader: Tony Fuchs, (Phone) 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com ATTENDEES Marty Vaughn ( Biota Pacific), Bob Nelson, (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation), Tony Fuchs and Cary Feldmann (Puget Sound Energy), Lauri Vigue (Washington Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Don Gay, and Carl Corey (USFS), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental for the Louis Berger Group), Erin Colclazier, Thomas Mohagen and Tom Hamer (Hamer Environmental), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Ron Tressler (EDAW) by phone, Chris Madsen (NWIFC) by phone, Bob Koontz (National Park Service), Dee Endleman (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) SCHEDULE FOR FUTURE WORKING GROUP MEETINGS Regular meetings: March 20, April 17, May15, June 19 (location?), July 17, Aug. 21 (location?), Sept. 18, Oct.16, Nov.20 (location?) CONFERENCE CALL LINE: ALL WERE REMINDED, ESPECIALLY DURING THESE WINTER MONTHS, THAT THE CONFERENCE CALL LINE WILL BE OPEN DURING ALL THESE BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/20/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1 of 8   MEETINGS. PLEASE CALL 1-866-280-6429 AND ENTER PARTICIPANT CODE: 144995 #. Let Lyn know before the meeting starts if you are calling in (call her at 425-890-3613). AGENDA for our February 20, 2003 Meeting PSE Office in Mount Vernon 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. Bring a sack lunch and we’ll work through! 1. 2. 3. 4.  Introductions Review notes/agenda/action items Studies: (Do Vegetation first!) Assess sufficiency of data • What conclusions can we draw? • Analysis methods • What are additional (data needs?) • How might we collect it? • What additional analysis needs? • PME refinement (as next step) 5. Confirm location and set agenda for our March 20, 2003 meeting 6. Evaluate meeting  NEW ACTION ITEMS • Tony: Confirm Mountlake Terrace location for our March 20 meeting (Team leader note: I confirmed the location, and we are “on” at Mountlake Terrace!) • Kathy: Talk with Cary re: topics/scenarios for HYDROPS runs. • Tom: Get CD with Forest Service data to Ron to see if he can use it (elk telemetry). • ALL: Give Kathy input re: terrestrial interests related to the HYDROPS model. • Ron: Got UFSF data from Don re: seasonal use of trails (noting those of high usage), and all FS roads that are drivable. No gate information is included. He will work with Joetta (R2) re: mapping these seasonal closures, etc. • Ron: Write up Grizzly Study Plan ASAP. • Erin: Write up species analysis report for Yellow Sedge and its interaction with Reed Canary Grass prior to our April meeting (April17th). • Tony: Post T13 to the web and notified members by email. • Tony: Post T15 map on R-2’s FTP site and let members know when it is there. • ALL: Review T2/T5 reports and T16 reports by next meeting (March 20.) • Tom: After incorporating comments, send out CD with final reports (T2/T5 and T16). • Tony: Post figures from draft final reports to R2s FTP website. • Tony: Send out email with instructions for accessing the FTP website (note on subject line). • Marty: Post T7 Report to PSE website. • Marty: Send out more complete report on T7b by Mar. 15. • ALL: Review reports and begin to identify some alternatives that make sense. • Lauri: Check into getting DNR road information (talk with Ron). • Bob/Carl: Look at getting a CD to Ron containing elk-related GIS data. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/20/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2 of 8   • • • • • • • • •  Tony: Ask Andy for a summary of seasonal recreation use. Don: Check with Skagit County/Fire Department re: residence maps. Ron: Contact Steve Bratz (Crown Pacific) re: road closures information on non-federal lands. Ron: Revise the Elk Study plan to reflect Don’s comments and send it out by March 3. ALL: Review the Grizzly study plan and let Tony know if they feel a conference call teamlet is necessary. Don: Review historical photos for indication of other bogs. Lauri: Check out Hood Canal bog contact – Keith DeBlanca. Patrick: Send British Columbia Bog Group contact information to Tony to distribute. Tony: See that Study Plan is drafted to assess influences of change in reservoir levels on the bog.  INTRODUCTIONS We welcomed Thomas Mohagen of Hamer Environmental. Thomas drafted the amphibian study plan and has been covering for Leah in her absence. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Marty: Checked into validity of data coverages for T-15. Specifically, checked stand age data (DNR has data all clumped together). Joetta said that what we have is the best they’ve got. • Ron: Combined telemetry data from Lori Anderson (Farrow) and NWIFC into a format for plotting in the T15 map, and provided that information to R2 for plotting. • Kathy: Requested update species lists from agencies. • Laura: Got Kathy known basin rare plant information by the end of January 2003. • ALL: Reviewed elk study plan from Ron for discussion at out February meeting. • Ron: Met with Don re: cover type requirements for Grizzly. • Marty: Provided Don with a copy of table of 5 ft. contour intervals of draw down vegetation gains. • Tony: Estimated size of “cliff/talus” on East shore of Baker Lake. It is a rocky outcrop, 50 yard wide and about 15 feet high, no stumps. From full pool up there are trees. • Tom: Had Erin contact Ann re: T16. She corrected the rare plant UTM coordinates. • Tony: Included driving directions with the Agenda for this meeting. REPORT ON STUDIES See table below for updates on: T2 & 5, 4, 7, 7b, 12, 16, 17, 21, 23. Study # T2  Title  Notes/Next Steps  Vegetation Mapping in Project Area  T4  Analysis Species Assessment  T5  Wetland Inventory Study  This has been combined with T5 for draft final summary report. Erin distributed copies of the final report. They will put this on CDs for distribution. She reported that three wetlands (WB-12, WB-21, and WB-30) stood out as high quality habitat for animal species and water quality. All priority assessments are done except Grizzly bear (should be done today). Tom reports that they are also finishing up Pileated Woodpecker and Marbled Murrelet. This is combined with T-2. See above.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/20/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3 of 8   T6 T7 T7b  T-9,10 T11 R-T12  T13  Noxious Weed Assessment and Control Plan Historic Vegetation of the UB and LB Projects Future vegetation mapping  Recreation use, effects on Mt. Goat Habitat use Oregon Spotted Frog Inventory Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging Habitat Value  T15  Survey and Manage Terrestrial Mollusk Survey Basin Vegetation Mapping  T16  Project Area Rare Plant Survey  T17  Amphibian Studies in Reservoir Fluctuation Zone  R-T18 R-T19 RT21  Breeding Bird Surveys Habitat Evaluation Studies Elk studies  The Final Study Plan is nearly complete. Tom will run it by Laura for review before distributing it. Marty distributed the Final Report. Marty distributed a preliminary report and walked us through the changes he made as a result of input he received from team members. The group’s comments will be addressed in the final report. Did not discuss at this meeting. Don has drafted a PME for our review with regard to mountain goats. Did not discuss at this meeting. Don is in the process of reviewing the draft Study Plan Ron sent him. He will give Ron his comments February 21. Ron will revise the plan to reflect Don’s comments and send it out by March 3. All will review the plan and let Tony know if they feel a conference call teamlet is necessary. Did not discuss at this meeting. The final report is complete. It will be posted to the relicensing website. Did not discuss at this meeting. This map, (including cover types, wetland and seral stage information) is now available. Tony will post it on R-2’s FTP site and let members know when it is there. Erin distributed the second draft report. We are still awaiting information from Natural Heritage database. Only one rare species (15 plants were found): Carex flava. It is listed by USFS as sensitive. The rest are all Survey and Manage moss/lichens. Tom distributed this report along with a couple of examples of analysis species. A master table that ties to Figure 2 is still being cleaned up. It includes 300 amphibian records. There was discussion around conducting additional studies in the drawdown zone this spring (R-T17b). The estimated cost for this study is $75,000 (in addition to the $140,000 already spent). The question was raised about the fiscal responsibility of spending this additional money when that money could be diverted toward PMEs. There was discussion about the adequacy of our existing data. Climate and reservoir level fluctuations are variable and affect our data. One approach we could take would be to wait until we see what the reservoir management is and go from there. We agreed to revisit this in March. Did not discuss at this meeting. (Combined with T-19.) Did not discuss at this meeting. Ron has incorporated GIS data from Lou Bender. He will also include the Lori Farrow Anderson data. Bob and Carl  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/20/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4 of 8   RT22 RT23  Fluctuation Zone Enhancement Sphagnum Bog Survey  will see if they can send Ron additional elk GIS data. Tony distributed the draft Study Plan (T21) that was sent out for review February 10. Ron will integrate comments into the next draft of the Study Plan and we agreed to approve the plan with those additions. The Elk Analysis Species Assessment was well received. We will go forward with this as part of a PME. Lauri explained the need to do some further study on the bog habitat on Baker Lake. It is unknown if it is partially affected by changes in reservoir levels. She sees the need to do some further study on this (maybe doing a literature review, etc.) to look at impacts the project is having on this area (recreation, reservoir inundation, roads, etc.). It would also be helpful to develop more information on bogs in the Basin. Species affected could be rare plants and a couple of species of beetles. The aim would be to mitigate for any project impacts. It might call for adaptive management over the term of the license. We could also set up some long term monitoring to help understand the effects of proposed activities. In the meantime, we could survey for the two beetle species. We agreed that protecting this bog (WB-30) and research to understand the nature of bogs in the Basin are things we want to do. The need for using a reference area further upstream for comparison of bog habitat was also discussed. We decided, as a next step, to do an analysis species – type of assessment on bogs and the two potentially affected beetles. We also decided to put together a Study Plan to monitor the hydraulic connectivity influence of the reservoir on the bog. Other parts of the discussion included: • Survey for other potential bog sites • Assess scope/cost of doing beetle survey • Tag bog/wetland/sensitive areas as potential conflict with recreation • High PME potential We’ll continue to discuss this at our March 20 meeting.  ASSESS SUFFICIENCY OF DATA • What conclusions can we draw? • Analysis methods • What additional data needs? How might we collect it? • What additional analysis needs? • PME refinement (as next step) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/20/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5 of 8   PLAN FOR MARCH CROSS-RESOURCE WORKSHOP Prior to the Workshop A CD listing all the PME options that each research Working Group is considering along with a draft agenda for the March Workshop will be out by February 20th. Participants will be asked to fill out a pre-workshop worksheet to consider how to resolve conflicts, etc. PSE will send out their draft proposed actions (with elements of Working Group PMEs) for review on Feb. 26. This proposal is a subset of the PMES brainstormed in the Working Groups and takes into account the interests of stakeholders in the process. March 4, Tuesday (afternoon only) 1:00-5:00 High level PMEs presentations by a member of each Working Group (Cultural, Terrestrial, Aquatics, Recreation, Economics/Operations) Marty has graciously accepted our request that he do our presentation Probable Attendees: Marty (presenter), Kathy, Patrick, Cary, Bob Koontz, Bob Nelson March 5, Wednesday (all day) Dee will begin with a review of the background of our process to date. She will then do a brief training session on interest-based negotiations to kick things off. Then we will walk through PSE’s draft proposed actions, highlighting pieces that have cross-resource implications e.g., the proposed reservoir management regime. Joel Molander of PSE will explain how PSE came up with its reservoir management plan (share outputs from HYDROPs model runs, etc.) Then we will split up into small cross-resource groups to: Flag impacts on resource (add conflicts to lists already posted from Feb. Working Group meeting) List how it affects the organizational interests Report back to the larger group Probable Attendees: Marty, Kathy, Patrick, Cary, Bob Koontz, Bob Nelson, Stan, Lauri March 6, Thursday (all day) Finish PSE Proposal (pieces with cross resource implications) Review other PMEs with cross resource implications Review (amended) list of conflicts Brainstorm to resolve conflicts Review (amended) list of conflicts Brainstorm to optimize synergies Plan next steps Probable Attendees: Marty, Kathy, Patrick, Cary, Bob Koontz, Bob Nelson, Stan, Lauri (half day) HANDOUTS (Those that will be posted to the website are bolded.) • Baker River Project Terrestrial Working Group Analysis Species – Common Loon and Big Brown Bat BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/20/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6 of 8   • • • • • • •  Baker River Project Relicense Study T17b – Amphibian Surveys in the Reservoir Fluctuation Zones of the Baker Lake Project Area Baker River Project Relicense Study T16 – 2nd Draft Report for Rare Plant Surveys for the Baker River Project Area Studies T2 and T5 – Vegetation Mapping in Vegetation of the Baker River Project Area, February 2003 Relicense Study T7 Final Report –Historic Vegetation of the Baker River Project Area Relicense Study 7b Draft Report T23 Baker River Project Relicensing Study Request Title – Sphagnum Bog Survey. Cross Resource Workshop, Baker River Hydroelectric Project No. 2150 (Key conflicts, Key synergies, Shared Interests/Concerns)  PARKING LOT • Conceptual Mitigation Approach (PMEs) • Review time frame/goals of working groups/milestones • Definitions of “project boundary”, “project effects”, “previous environment”, “project area”, NEPA definitions • Watershed Analysis Presentation • Land Management – Do study? • Make list of all available relevant data. Create a subset of those data for Tony to always bring to meetings for group to continually reference. • Are transmission lines in or out of FERC boundary? • Changing Climate Patterns • Determine land management allocations within Project boundary • Interface with Access Management Plan • Come up with optimal reservoir operation scenario(s) from Terrestrial perspective (HYDROPs) • Set up “face to face” meetings with Russ Paul to review our proposals MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones • Location • Great attendance • Nice maps! • Got started early • Very productive discussions • Brussels (cookies) were good • Food- Raisinettes and other! • Nice to see Study Plans leading to next steps What to Change for Next Time • Ran over • Location • Only partially addressed the main topic • Evaluation ran long BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/20/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 7 of 8   WHAT’S HOT? • Frogs and bogs… actually bogs are only luke warm • Concern with straw man at workshop (participants didn’t create it) STUDIES STATUS FOR SOLUTION TEAM • Amphibian Study (considering next steps) • Bogs – Made good progress (Study Plan to be developed) • Grizzly Bears – Study Plan is underway • Elk - Study Plan is underway Agenda for March 20, 2003 Meeting PSE Office in Mountlake Terrace 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. Bring a sack lunch and we’ll work through! 1. Introductions 2. Review notes/agenda/action items 3. Assess sufficiency of data • What conclusions can we draw? • Analysis methods What are additional (data needs?) Make determination re: sufficiency of Analysis species • How might we collect additional data? • What additional analysis needs? • PME refinement (as next step) 4. Studies Reports • New Study Request: Carex flava 5. Confirm location and set agenda for our April 17, 2003 meeting 6. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/20/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 8 of 8    2003terrestrial20030220.pdf en 