BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session September 30, 2003 8:30 am until 2pm U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA  AGENDA Review Agenda, Notes, Action Items Review agreements from 9/17/03 meeting • Updated full list of PME’s (from Marty) • 1.2.4 Amphibians (reservoir level) Acreage • Resume discussion of options, such as risk sharing, from last meeting PME’s that still need to have tentative agreement, need to address in this meeting: • 1.2.4 Amphibians • 1.2.5 Connectivity • 1.4.1 Rare Plants • 1.4.2 Noxious Weeds • 1.?.? Breeding Birds Meeting review • Agreements reached • Action plans Agenda for next RESOLVE session, confirm time and place Adjourn  Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Terrestrial Working Group RESOLVE Session Final Notes September 30, 2003 USFS Offices Mountlake Terrace, WA  REVISED FINAL MEETING NOTES  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Don Gay and Laura Potash (USFS), Gene Stagner (USFWS), Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific), Tony Fuchs and Cary Feldmann (PSE), Carl Corey by phone (USFS), Lauri Vigue (WDFW), Bob Nelson (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation), Len Barson (The Nature Conservancy), Lyn Wiltse (facilitator) NOTE: The Next RESOLVE Meetings WILL BE OCTOBER 16 AND 17 FROM 8:30 TO 2:00. Agenda • Review notes, agenda, action items • Review notes from 8/21/03 meeting • Acreage o BAWG priorities and needs o PSE proposed costs o How far apart are we? How should we proceed? • 1.2.5 Connectivity • 1.2.4 Amphibians • Next Agenda Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session Page 1 of 5   New Action Items • Lauri: Clarify with Julie intent to protect winter (vs. breeding) eagle roost sites. • Gene: Send Marcot snag model to group. • Tony: E-mail group results of HYDROPS run re: amphibians. He thinks the run is done. • Tony: Button up with Laura re: special plants cost estimate. • Don: Make estimate for goat thing planning and implementation (by October 3). • Marty: Button up with Ron re: Getting final elk report out asap. • Don: Attempt to come up with an estimate of what portion of the total PME package might be satisfied if a sweeeeet piece of property were purchased. • Tony: Update cost estimates associated with the Rare Plant PME and send out to members to review. • Laura, Carl, and Tony: Rework language in Carex flava management plan to include flexibility, etc. • Laura: Rework Noxious Weeds PME language (control, etc and run by Carl, Tony, Laurel for review prior to Oct. 17 meeting). • Don: Provide connectivity map to Tony asap. To permit the greatest degree of open dialogue, the group agreed that notes for the RESOLVE sessions will be less formal than regular working group meetings. We will primarily document agreements and action items. RESOLVE Groundrules and Criteria Following are the original RESOLVE ground rules agreed to by the working group: • • • • • • • • • • •  1  Work at understanding one another. Use airtime wisely. Speak honestly and respectfully. Examine assumptions. Make tentative agreements, then look at the whole package together. One meeting review rule: we have one meeting to review and change the tentative agreements of the previous RESOLVE session.1 Document our agreements. Caucuses are okay. For each PME, we will begin by identifying the goal and measurable objectives We will use the 5/7/03 PME’s, as updated, for our RESOLVE discussion. After we have agreed to a PME, Marty will revise it to reflect our agreement. Only after that will draft settlement language be written.  All agreements are tentative even after the “one meeting review rule”. However, the one meeting rule gives regular participants an opportunity to bring an agreement back to the table while assuring that tentative agreements are not forever reopened. It also accommodates regular participants who must miss a meeting and may want to weigh in on a decision. The group also agreed that materials to be considered at the RESOLVE session would be sent out in advance, per regular working group rules, if group members were expected to attempt agreement on those materials. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session, September 30, 2003 Page 2 of 5   Discussion re: Document Distribution • We’ll be consistent about what will be sent via email and what will be given out as hard copy. At the end of each meeting, we’ll decide what will go out in each type of format. If email, we’ll each be responsible for making copies. 1.3.2: Loons No further discussion required. 1.3.4: Bald Eagles—Non-Project Lands Lauri talked with Julie who said that protections were dropping for bald eagles and they are doing really well in the west side of the State. The thing that would benefit them most is protection of winter (or breeding) season roosting sites. Lauri will follow up with Julie to verify that she intended winter season roost sites. A teamlet of Bob Carey, Lauri, Tony, and Marty will meet to work on revising the PME to reflect the emphasis on night roost sites. They will also work on a survey methodology. They will explore using Tom Hamer’s radar to find night roosts. 1.3.6: Bald Eagle Monitoring See notes above. PME List Marty sent out the May PME package, update for June electronically to members on Sept. 29. He also sent out a summary of the PMEs agreed on to date. He distributed hard copies of these at the meeting. Amphibian Reservoir Level This is a cross resource concern. Tony explained PSE is proposing reservoir management that will protect known amphibian breeding sites. On Sept. 29, Hamer sent out the addendum to the amphibian report. This contains the reservoir levels (for Shannon and Baker) and associated egg mass sites for the affected time period (March, April, and the first half of May). Don acknowledged the conflicts with recreational desire for a high reservoir level by Memorial Day. There are issues around managing water levels to protect salmon. He feels like the final decision on how the reservoir will be managed will not end up necessarily benefiting the amphibians, given the other resource interests. We agreed to wait and see what the proposed reservoir management regime ends up being is and how it will affect amphibians. If this proposal doesn’t turn out to protect amphibians, we will handle it through the amphibian PMEs. Acreage Discussion Discussion around timing and sharing of risks: Why should PSE put money down before accepting the license? It would go a long way toward satisfying the interests of the parties. Note: Bob offered that the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation might be able to step in and provide financing up front and then be Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session, September 30, 2003  Page 3 of 5   reimbursed by PSE after settlement. Another option would be for PSE to buy property now and then if we didn’t reach settlement agreement, PSE could turn around and sell it. By our next meeting, Don will do some work around defining how much of the PME package would be satisfied by purchasing a really sweet piece of property. We may want to consider objectives for a comprehensive land acquisition plan to get the most value for the most resource benefits possible. The challenge in using a dollar cap for acquisition is lack of certainty for other participants that the lands acquired will actually accomplish resource objectives. BAWG Meeting Report The BAWG met September 29 and discussed various methods of costing out the PME package. Don will come up with a draft of costs associated with the PMEs by October 16. 1.2.4: Amphibians In proposed action, 3 acres would be created for amphibian breeding habitat. The BAWG focus is acquiring and enhancement. PSE will be signing up for a dollar figure to devote to amphibian habitat enhancement and restoration. We will look at setting up goals/targets and having a funding mechanism for meeting those targets at our next meeting. 1.4.1: Rare Plants Laura reported that the PME is fine with her as it is. Some monitoring would begin next summer. Tony distributed a handout on projected costs. General land costs minus the Carex flava would be around $429,000 (2003 dollars). This would be spread over 30 years. These costs were based on a series of assumptions. Both Tony and Laura are comfortable with the accuracy of this estimate. Carex flava is state listed sensitive (not threatened and endangered federally). Laura distributed a handout outlining a site management plan for carex flava. There appears to be about two acres that contain clumps of carex flava in the project boundary. A 200 foot buffer from reed canary grass was suggested. Do we do research to verify this number? Is there more cost in treatment or in monitoring to see if the treatment worked? There is overlap with the Noxious Weed Management Plan. After some discussion, we agreed it is premature to discuss projected costs at this point. The interest is to prevent the decline of the population. As we flesh out the rare plant management plan, we agreed to include some flexibility so we could add or drop plants, and not be tied down to specific actions over time. This would make sense as long as we had clear targets to achieve. Next Steps: Carl will send next iteration of this management plan to Laura to review and discuss with Tony. We all will discuss this at out next RESOLVE meeting. 1.4.2: Noxious Weeds We all like this PME as it reads with the except for a controversy over changing the word “control” to “management”. We will spell out specifics of all the requirements of a Noxious Weed Management Program. We all agreed that the intent is to follow the laws that are in place. We say our goal is to manage to meet the appropriate standards and then refer to a table that shows the level of management as Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session, September 30, 2003  Page 4 of 5   per state/federal laws. We would need to include a note that these would be updated as state/federal laws changed. Laura will address the control definitions and create the table. She will then work with others to Carl, Laurel, and Tony. We’ll review this at our next meeting. Agenda for October 16, 2003 Meeting (RESOLVE instead of the Technical Meeting) Note: We will have Tom Hamer and Ron Tressler waiting in the wings to assist with any technical issues that arise (especially re: amphibians and elk). o Review agenda, notes, action items o Review of agreements from 9/30 meeting o Acreage o 1.2.4: Amphibians o 1.2.5: Connectivity o 1.4.1: Rare Plants o Noxious Weeds o Breeding Birds o Set agenda for October 17 RESOLVE Meeting  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session, September 30, 2003  Page 5 of 5    2003terrestrial20030930.pdf en 