 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group April 28th, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 21905 64th Ave. West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 AGENDA 1. Review / revise minutes / agenda 2. Review action items 3. Draft study report review R9 – Electronic Monitoring R12 – Site Inventory R16 – Needs Analysis 4. Debrief March 28th Cross-Resource Workshop 5. Review Draft PSE Proposed Action – Determine next steps. 6. Set agenda / location for April 28th meeting 7. Evaluate meeting. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group April 28, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace WA 98273 FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 853- 8341. PRESENT Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Cindy Bjorklund (National Park Service), Dave Reid (PSE), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council ), Carol Efird (Louis-Berger), Jim Eychaner (Interagency Committee for Outdoor Recreation: IAC), Andy Hatfield (PSE), Susan Rosenbrough (National Parks), Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), facilitator and Dawn Schink, notetaker (PSE). 2003 SCHEDULE May 19 (third Monday), Jun 23, Jul 28, Aug. 25, Sept.22. Oct 27, Nov.17 (third Monday), December 15 (third Monday). Assume Forest Service Office in Mountlake Terrace unless otherwise specified. CONFERENCE CALL LINE: ALL WERE REMINDED, ESPECIALLY DURING THESE WINTER MONTHS, THAT THE CONFERENCE CALL LINE WILL BE OPEN DURING ALL THESE MEETINGS. PLEASE CALL 1-866-280-6429 AND ENTER PARTICIPANT CODE: 144995 #. All meetings are from 9:00 to 2:30 unless otherwise specified. Baker River Project Relicense January 27, 2003 Page 1 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group April 28, 2003 Agenda – USFS Office/Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. Studies Results • Data gaps • Next Steps • % responsibility for PME (USFS/PSE) 4. Debrief March Cross-Resource Workshop 5. Set agenda/location for May 19. meeting 6. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: provide specific comments on report by May 5th on R9. Chris will further develop data, if possible. • Ann: Check with Jim Neiland (Lewis River settlement) re: criteria used in that settlement on dispersed camping sites. • Andy & Dee: Set up way to have dispersed site cross resource discussion at 5/14 workshop • Chris: Use information to refine R12 data • Teamlet: Andy, Chris, Ann, Brian – meet at Baker before 5/19 to select subset of viewpoints for F.G. assessment. • Andy: Call Saul Weisberg re: 6.5 of Proposed draft action • All: Contact Andy by 4/29 if problem with 2nd draft PME’s REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Andy: Make sure dispersed site data (questions re: descriptions of dispersed sites) is attached to GIS layer (rather than remaining in tabular form) – also make sure occupancy rates are included. • Andy: Check in with Lauri re: wildlife constraints (how to handle sensitive data reports). • Andy: Button up with Chris re: results of Non-Highway. Vehicles survey (NOVA) to supplement information from R9. • Ann & Andy: Work onVisioning roll-up and sent to PSE. Ann reviewed feedback from Kathy Ludlow on essence statements. STUDIES R9: ELECTRON MONITORING Chris gave us an overview of the R-9 Study Report. Jim noted that the IAC’s NOVA study could provide an interesting source of secondary data. It was suggested that it would be helpful to see some more development of data re: number of visitors overnight vs. day use types of vehicles, where people are going, activities involved, when driving around, distribution by boat ramp (although these counts may be represented in R13 & 16). R12: SITE INVENTORY Chris gave an overview of R12 methods and overall conclusions (i.e., no surprising results.) A question Baker River Project Relicense January 27, 2003 Page 2 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group was raised about whether this study covered conflicts among recreation users. It does not, although Visitor’s Survey has some information on that. It was also noted that it would be helpful to expand the descriptions of the clusters of dispersed sites to facilitate making determinations regarding managing dispersed sites based on accepted criteria, including use. We would like to see clusters by geographic area with a description of issues. The other working groups might also be interested in these clusters. It might be a good topic by the May 14th meeting. It was also suggested that data calculated/displayed regarding occupancy could be improved (by looking at number of observations/the time it could be occupied to come up with occupancy rate). Concerns were raised about this method requiring a good amount of conjecture. It was suggested that we check into the criteria used on the Lewis River Project to see if it resolves the concerns raised. It was agreed that the purpose of these data (R12) is to assist in developing management plan for dispersed sites by identifying which to “harden”, which to consider closing. It was suggested that FS monitor dispersed use over time and manage to avoid impact on forest/national park wilderness in Basin. R16: NEEDS ANALYSIS Chris gave an overview of R16 conclusions, noting the information gathered was fairly wide ranging. It was suggested that there be observation of day use/developed areas over the upcoming Memorial Day weekend to see if capacity problems exist (there appear to be capacity issues on a site-specific basis rather than basin wide capacity issues, per study results). It was noted that, for type of people visit at the area (sunny weekend people), the utilization may be higher than is indicated by the survey (which includes cloudy weekdays.) The idea was raised to consider having more flexible configurations to allow for more multiple family/group sites. We also discussed underutilization of Baker Lake Resort and the possible reason for this. It was suggested that in the study report, it be noted there are some differences between how NSRE & SCORP view information/projections regarding recreational use and what those differences are. STUDIES - NEXT STEPS All should give feedback to Chris on drafts to clarify current data. As we further work on PME’s, we may ask to “drill down” further into the data & add this to the reports. AESTHETICS STUDY PROGRESS Chris first gave out copies of R11/15 to group members. He then gave update on status of Aesthetics Study. It was suggested that current photos give a good overall view of aesthetic situation, although taking more photos at additional different elevations might be helpful. We should cover photos of swim beaches. We discussed what to do once we have the pictures. It was suggested that PSE might do onsite focus group to get aesthetics of preferences. It was also suggested that PSE seek other venues for feedback (eg, Concrete meeting or USFS office). It was decided to form a teamlet to select subset of these pictures for these focus groups. PME DISCUSSION We reviewed 6.4 and 6.5 and made agreed upon changes. FISH PASSAGE Upstream fish passage will be a trap and haul. Downstream has many differences between the stakeholders. The top choices are gulper and fish screens. Baker River Project Relicense January 27, 2003 Page 3 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group CROSS RESOURCE DEBRIEFING Good sense of area concerns. Some were disperse sites, some not. PARKING LOT • Presentation of National Forest Plan • Land management • Forest Service presentation of SMS • Hold periodic “outreach” meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) • Field trip- summer 2003? • Review USFS Roads Analysis Report- 2003? • Tie education piece to ALL Working Groups EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well • Dee did a good job • Good strong coffee • Productive discussion on the studies • Lots of participants Need for Improvement • Miss Saul & Brian What’s Hot? • Reviewing Studies • Moving forward with collaborative efforts with other groups Studies Update • Have a lot of them done • In process of revisions and evaluating drafts • Aesthetics • Visioning port of R16 • Can share drafts with any other working groups TENTATIVE AGENDA May 19, 2003 Agenda – USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. NOTE: BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Debrief May 14th Cross Resource Workshop 2. How to RESOLVE issues 3. Discussion of Aesthetics study (debrief of teamlet) 4. Study Status Baker River Project Relicense January 27, 2003 Page 4 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group • R9 • R12 • R16 • R11/15 5. Hydrops run update Baker River Project Relicense January 27, 2003 Page 5 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  