BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group Meeting July 16th, 2003 (8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m.) (Bring Sack Lunch) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-866-280-6429, code 144995# (Please tell Tony or Lyn (425-890-3613) if you plan to call into meeting) AGENDA Review notes/revise agenda/action items Hydrops (TST) Update (Including Datum change discussion) Technical discussion of data from studies: T21 (elk) and T12 (grizzly) <b7> Review road and trail use overlay for recreational effects <b7> Discuss what data we are getting and how to use them <b7> Determine layout for reports Review new PME (MAPS) Review of "Final" T7b Report HEP, T17 (amphibians), T6 (noxious weeds), and T16 (rare plants) Set agenda for September 18th at Mountlake Terrace (next Technical WG meeting) Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group Technical Meeting July 16, 2003 8:30 a.m. <ad> 2:00 p.m. USFS Office Mountlake Terrace, WA  FINAL MEETING MINUTES Mission: "To develop alternative solutions and recommendations, addressing terrestrial and wildlife resource interests for the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement that: <b7> accurately defines and describes the existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; <b7> identifies project effects (existing and proposed) leading to development of protection, mitigation, and enhancement options." Team Leader: Tony Fuchs, (Phone) 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com ATTENDEES Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific), Tony Fuchs and Cary Feldmann (Puget Sound Energy), Lauri Vigue (Washington Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Gene Stagner (USFWS), Laura Potash and Don Gay (USFS), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental for the Louis Berger Group), Bob Kuntz (National Park Service), Tom Hamer (Hamer Environmental), Ron Tressler (EDAW), Stan Walsh (Skagit Systems Cooperative), Chris Madsen (Northwest Indian Fish Commission), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator, and Mary Jean Bullock, notetaker, (PDSA Consulting, Inc.) SCHEDULE FOR REGULAR TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP MEETINGS (At USFS Building in Mountlake Terrace from 8:30 to 2:00 unless otherwise specified) (Note: there will be no regular technical meeting in the month of Aug), Sept. 18, Oct.16, Nov. 20 (location?), December 18 SCHEDULE FOR RESOLVE WORKING GROUP MEETINGS July 17 (8:30-2:00), August 8 at Sawyer Hall in Lacey (8:00-12:00), and August 21 (8:30 <ad> 2:00). These meetings, except where otherwise indicated will be at the USFS Office in Mountlake Terrace.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1 of 9   THE CONFERENCE CALL LINE WILL BE OPEN DURING ALL THESE MEETINGS. PLEASE CALL 1-866-280-6429 AND ENTER PARTICIPANT CODE: 144995 #. Let Lyn (technical meetings) know before the meeting starts if you are planning to call in (call her at 425-890-3613). Let Dee (RESOLVE meetings) know before the meeting starts if you are planning to call in (call her at 206-2719750).  Agenda for July 16, 2003 Technical Meeting USFS Office in Mountlake Terrace 8:30 a.m.-2:00 p.m. Bring a sack lunch and we'll work through!  1. Review notes/agenda/action items 2. HYDROPS Update 3. Technical discussion of data from studies: T21 (Elk) and T12 (Grizzly) <b7> Review roads and trails and trail use overlay for recreational effects <b7> Discuss what data we are getting and how to use them <b7> Determine layout for report 4. Review new PME (MAPS) 5. Review "final" T7b Report 6. T19 (Habitat Evaluation Studies), T17 (Amphibians), T6 (Noxious Weeds), and T16 (Rare Plants) 7. Set agenda for September 18, 2003 8. Evaluate meeting.  NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Get any comments on "final" T7b Study Plan to Marty by the end of July. <b7> ALL: Let Tony know if you'd like Master CD #1 (from R2 showing official project elevations and daily flows). <b7> ALL: Touch base with Andy Hatfield (Team Leader for Recreation Working Group) if you want to attend trail field trip August 5, or dispersed sites field trip August 18. <b7> ALL: Review A14a report (on FTP website). Note erosion levels around shorelines. Consider terrestrial concerns/interests. <b7> Tony: Get copies of most current maps for August 5 (trails) and 18 (dispersed camp sites) field trips. <b7> Don: Check with Skagit County/Fire Department re: residence maps. <b7> Tom: Continue to update studies affected by NAVD 88 (T2, T5, T17). Note: R2 has put out a CD (see first bullet above) that contains updated data on project elevations. <b7> Dee: Create a one page summary of the RESOLVE process for attorneys. <b7> ALL: Review Greta's "Next Steps" suggested for erosion control. Let Tony know if you have feedback. <b7> ALL: By end of July, Get Ron T. comments re: modeling aspects of elk study. Is use of IVMP adequate? Should we apply CART to IVMP? Ron will set up conference call (tentatively on 7/25) with: Ron D., Stan, Bob N., Chris, Tony (probably Marty instead), Don, and Laura (respecting her expertise in this arena!). <b7> Ron: Send CART data to Tony to distribute (prior to the above 7/25 conference call).  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2 of 9   <b7> Tony: Give new heron information to Julie at WDFW. <b7> Tony: Send out tadpole photos (with site reference #s) to Lauri, Gene, Don, Marty, and Tom - or make available on PSE website. <b7> Tony: Remind Ron of meeting dates (RESOLVE and Technical Working Group meetings) <b7> ALL: Get comments to Tom by the end of July re: T4: two beetles and carex flava. <b7> Tony: Talk with Joetta re: attending RESOLVE sessions and projecting GIS data from a CD. <b7> Tom: Ask Joetta about T2 database: overlay disturbance codes (fire ring) with dispersed recreation site locations identified by Recreation Working Group.  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Kathy: Researched activities reasonable certain to occur (other than federal actions) over the period of the new license. She reported that only Lake Shannon is in question. It is largely rural timberlands. She expects it to be maintained as timberland. There is always the risk of some residential development, but this would probably not be along the shoreline. These assumptions will go into the ESA portion of the EA. <b7> Tony: Posted T7 and T13 Reports to the PSE website and notified members by email. <b7> Tony: Invited Ron and Chris to July meeting. Asked Ron to bring available elk and grizzly data. <b7> Tony: Emailed out wetland spreadsheets for Baker and Shannon. <b7> ALL: Informed Tony if you want hard copies of priority analysis species. <b7> Tony: Updated contact list to show Ron's new phone number. <b7> Joetta: Developed an index of available GIS data on R2's FTP site. <b7> Tony: Checked on who would be back-up for Joetta in handling requests for GIS data <b7> All: Continued to verify as needed the accuracy of constraint maps being used by the Recreational Working Group. Note: Field trips are planned for Aug. 5 (trails) and 18 (by boat to survey dispersed recreation sites on the east side of the reservoir). <b7> Gene: Sent Kathy 14 page request for additional info re: PSE's BA. <b7> Tony: Created map of amphibian breeding analysis sites. Tony distributed updated tables and two maps indicating these sites. <b7> Tony: Contacted Bill Rogers re: Skagit County review of noxious weed data and participation in our Working Group. Bill wants us to send copies of the Skagit County data sheets. He will keep in touch that way. Bill stated that the proposed action for noxious weed control seemed adequate so his interests appear to be covered. <b7> Marty: Integrated BAWG - suggested changes to "Swan" wording (p.7 and 11 as noted in minutes). <b7> Tony: Buttoned up with Ron re: topics for July 16th meeting. <b7> Marty: Got "Final Report" for T7b out by July 10th. Added appendix to explain operating assumptions. <b7> Tony/Cary: Were to put together PowerPoint presentation explaining minimum generating vs. operating pool, dam operations, etc. Brought color copies of dam schematics. They didn't do this since these data are available on R2's CD (See first New Action Item).  GRETA'S SUGGESTIONS FOR EROSION CONTROL Tony distributed copies of an email that Greta Movassaghi had sent to Arnie Aspelund (Team Leader of the Aquatics Working Group). She had requested that her list of next steps for cross resource analysis  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3 of 9   that could be done be shared across all working groups. Laura reported that she is working with Greta on this for rare plants. Lauri expressed concern that resource concerns due to erosion around Lake Shannon also be addressed in this impact analysis. Greta would like to see feedback within the next month.  We will discuss this at out next meeting to ensure that all terrestrial interests will be addressed.  HYDROPS/TST Update (including Datum change discussion) Tony reported that all changes requested by the USFS have been made to the HYDROPS software. It has also been tweaked to reflect the new NAVD. The software has been QC'd and is fully functional.  They have defined 5 energy years for analysis: 1993, 95, 96, '01,'02. TST members feel that these years represent the full hydrologic spectrum. They were also selected because they are post SCL's new license flow regime.  They also agreed on the following ranking for soft constraints: <b7> #1 = Spill <b7> #2 = Minimum Instream Flow and Ramping <b7> #3 = Maximum Reservoir Level <b7> #4 = Minimum Powerhouse Release  The teamlet has defined various levels of analysis which would accompany the interpretation requesters of runs will receive from the group.  TST minutes are posted on the PSE website.  TECHNICAL DISCUSSION OF DATA FROM STUDIES: T21(ELK) AND T12 (GRIZZLY) <b7> Review road and trail use overlay for recreational effects <b7> Discuss what data we are getting and how to use them <b7> Determine layout for reports  NEW PME: MAPS Bob K. reported that he and Lauri have written up a draft PME. Bob will be incorporating the comments he received from the BAWG, along with specific recommendations. He will have this out for review by the entire Working Group by the week of July 21. (Team Leader note: this draft PME has been sent out to the working group for review).  A report will be out early October that will help direct our choices of what we will include in this PME. (Lauri and I can't seem to remember what report we were referring to. We should discuss again when we talk about this PME in the RESOLVE sessions). The focus of this PME would be to monitor breeding birds on acquired lands and on project lands to see if they are similar to lands intact outside the area to determine effectiveness of measures.  STUDIES Study Title #  Notes/Next Steps  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4 of 9   T2 T4 T5 T6 T7 T7b T-9,10 T11 T12 T13  Vegetation Mapping in Project Area Analysis Species Assessment Wetland Inventory Study Noxious Weed Assessment and Control Plan Historic Vegetation of the UB and LB Projects Future vegetation mapping Recreation use, effects on Mt. Goat Habitat use Oregon Spotted Frog Inventory Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging Habitat Value Survey and Manage Terrestrial  We are currently updating the tables in these areas to reflect the datum change for full pool. Thomas reported that the 2 beetle reports were sent out on 6/18. The bog report is basically complete. They are just incorporating the DNR data. This is combined with T-2. See above. Tom reported that the perimeter shoreline and stream surveys for Lake Shannon are complete. They are only one third complete for Baker Lake. Reed canary grass abounds. Laura has been reviewing the data sheets. Tony told folks that PSE has a weed control program (on non-federal lands) and they have been targeting Scotch Broom among other species of concern. Tony will touch base with Jason Schmidt about these activities as Jason will likely be involved in future weed control efforts. Laura reminded us that an EA or EIS must be done in order for herbicides to be used on federal lands. She is working on an EA for the Mount Baker Snoqualmie forest. She will keep us posted. This study is complete and has been approved. Marty will produce a new final report with revised numbers (NAVD) by the July meeting. Marty distributed hard copies of the T7b report that he revised to reflect the NAVD. He also expanded the discussion of the different scenarios and added a new graph showing reservoir elevations. All were asked to get any comments to Marty by the end of July. He will distribute copies of the final report at our next meeting. Did not discuss at this meeting. Don has drafted a PME for our review with regard to mountain goats. This study is complete and has been approved. Ron is awaiting data from Tom. Tom reported they have finished the sampling on June 6. They collected 1,200 sample bags to dry. They are 80% complete with this (15 burlap bags remain). All the drying should be finished by the end of this month. They are drying at the rate of two bags per 10-hour day. The database (including all weights and species by cover type) will also be complete by the end of July. They will look at adjusting the data for non-edible parts. (e.g., chickens!!!). Ron will get us at least the summary tables from these data by August 20. The Study Report will be issued thereafter. This study is complete and has been approved.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5 of 9   T15 T16 T17 R-T18 R-T19 T21  Mollusk Survey Basin Vegetation Mapping Project Area Rare Plant Survey Amphibian Studies in Reservoir Fluctuation Zone Breeding Bird Surveys Habitat Evaluation Studies Elk studies  This is complete. It helped us identify critical information for grizzly and elk studies. An additional use for this data set might be helping us understand how many acres of riparian habitat are available for different stream classes. Tom reported that they have received most of the data from the National Heritage database. We decided to have the additional ten wetlands and the Carex Flava be addenda to this report. Laura will button up with the Recreation Working Group re: known sites where there are proposed projects at their meeting Monday, July 21. With the NAVD change, three additional egg mass sites have been determined to be below full pool. The report with addendum should be out by the end of July. The addenda will include these two new tables: <b7> Egg mass types and elevations <b7> Habitat types in inundation zone Tom will set up a conference call to discuss Marty's comments and how to integrate them into the report. Tony showed recent tadpole photos he took, including the new heron nests he just discovered. There seemed to be plenty of tadpoles, even where not expected. Lake Shannon sites (#3 and #4 were dried up). Tony will cross reference these sites with the original T7b report site references. He will make these available on PSE's website. PME will be proposed by Bob K. and Lauri. In October, we identified 6 steps for this study. Marty reminded us how the habitat/species data on page 2 of his handout of the "Summary of Analysis Species Habitats" for Scenario 1 of T7b might be useful in determining next steps here <ad> the impact portion of the HEP. We may be able to use HSI models as well. The RESOLVE sessions may help clarify how we move forward here (the occasions to use HEP vs. how we apply it). Pending data from T7b and T4, we will discuss this (determine the level of PME) in an upcoming RESOLVE session Ron Tressler walked us through a handout he prepared that outlined the types of elk habitat monitoring being done by Ron Davis. He detailed how the following sub-studies were done: <b7> Captive elk monitoring <b7> Forage conditions in different types of stands in the  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6 of 9   RT22 RT23  Fluctuation Zone Enhancement Sphagnum Bog Survey  study area <b7> Determining seasonal use patterns Group Reactions to the study so far: <b7> Mountain Hemlock data is not necessary for settlement (no higher canopy areas would be relevant). <b7> We need a better definition of broad leaf and herbaceous dominated environment <b7> Don will head a teamlet to refine seasonal use zones. <b7> For management plans clean up categories: <b7> Summer range <b7> Winter range <b7> Year-round range; and <b7> Transition range <b7> Ron will call Joetta re: constraint study trail data <b7> Once Ron gets the nod from folks re: the vegetative layers he will overlay disturbance buffers on top of probability layers of vegetation. <b7> Tom will give relevant data to Ron by July 18. <b7> For PME opportunity purposes, we will add some recreation areas to the analysis (Grandy Lake, Lake Tyee, etc.). <b7> Ron will break down probabilities by habitat type and also look at federal vs. non federal. Note: We need to keep in mind we need data useable for PMEs as soon as possible. We will go forward with this as part of a PME. AESI set up monitoring devices at different elevations in the WB-30 Bog. They have buttoned up with Lauri and Tony on this and are drafting a bog monitoring plan for working group review. Preliminary information from the first two months of monitoring will be presented at the September meeting.  HANDOUTS (Those that will be posted to the website are bolded.) <b7> Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group <ad>RESOLVE meeting <b7> Suggestions from Greta Movassaghi re: the Review Draft of Study A14a <b7> Baker River Elk Habitat Study (T-21) <b7> Draft of Potential Future Vegetation of the Baker River Project Area <ad> Relicense Study T7-B Final Report <ad>FERC Project No. 2150 <b7> Invasive Weed Survey Update <ad> July 15, 2003  PARKING LOT <b7> Conceptual Mitigation Approach (PMEs) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 7 of 9   <b7> Review time frame/goals of working groups/milestones <b7> Definitions of "project boundary", "project effects", "previous environment", "project area", NEPA definitions <b7> Watershed Analysis Presentation <b7> Land Management <ad> Do study? <b7> Make list of all available relevant data. Create a subset of those data for Tony to always bring to meetings for group to continually reference. <b7> Changing Climate Patterns <b7> Determine land management allocations within Project boundary <b7> Interface with Access Management Plan <b7> Come up with optimal reservoir operation scenario(s) from Terrestrial perspective (HYDROPs) <b7> Set up "face to face" meetings with Russ Paul to review our proposals  MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones <b7> Well attended <b7> Got out early <b7> Northbound commute <b7> Facilitator didn't wear matching shoes.  What to Change for Next Time <b7> Find a cooler place <b7> Schedule changes (confusion)  WHAT'S HOT?! <b7> Meeting place (literally) <b7> Intense RESOLVE schedule  STUDIES STATUS FOR SOLUTION TEAM <b7> Elk and Grizzly on schedule <b7> Weeds and rare plants are underway <b7> Studies and GIS data we have are posted on R2's FTP site.  Tentative Agenda for September 18, Technical Meeting USFS Office in Mountlake Terrace 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. Bring a sack lunch and we'll work through! 1. Review notes/agenda/action items (including Stan's Alaska report) 2. TST and Adaptive Management Updates 3. Reaction to A14 (Shoreline Erosion) cross Resource Concerns (Greta's Next Steps email) 4. Technical discussion of data from studies: T21 (Elk), T12 (Grizzly), T19 (HEP), T17 (Amphibians, T6 (Noxious Weeds), T16(Rare Plants), T4 (Finalization of Analysis Species Report.), T2 database (overlay of dispersed recreation sites with disturbance codes indicating fire ring) 5. MAPS PME proposal  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 8 of 9   6. Set October 16 agenda 7. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 9 of 9    2003terrestrial20030716.pdf en 