BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session August 21, 2003 8am until noon USFWS Offices Sawyer Hall Lacey, WA AGENDA Review Agenda Review July 17th agreements Continue discussion on acreage issues <b7> What are interests of all parties regarding habitat acreage? <b7> What are alternatives for solving the issue in a way that respects these interests? 1.2.5--Provide connectivity habitat for low mobility species (time allowing) 1.2.4--Provide breeding habitat for amphibians (time allowing) Meeting review <b7> Agreements reached <b7> Action plans Agenda for next RESOLVE session, confirm time and place Adjourn Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Working Group RESOLVE Session Final Notes August 21, 2003 8 a.m. until noon USFS Offices Lacey, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Don Gay (USFS), Gene Stagner (USFWS), Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC), Cary Feldmann (PSE), Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific), Carl Corey (USFS), Lauri Vigue (WDFW), Bob Nelson (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation), Len Barson (The Nature Conservancy), Dee Endelman (facilitator) Agenda <b7> Review notes, agenda, action items <b7> Review July 17th agreements (1.1.3, 1.2.3, 1.3.1, 1.3.2, 1.3.4, 1.3.5, 1.3.6, 1.1.2) <b7> Acreage o What are the key interests? o Alternatives for resolution? <b7> 1.2.5 Connectivity <b7> 1.2.4 Amphibians <b7> Follow up on recent field trip <b7> Agenda for next RESOLVE session, confirm time and place Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session Page 1 of 5   New Action Items <b7> Tony--Re-send the 8/8/03 and send the 8/21/03 draft RESOLVE session notes out to the group on 9/2/03. <b7> All--Respond to the draft notes by 9/10/03. <b7> Marty--re-draft 1.3.2 (Loons) to clarify PSE's responsibility for off-site platform maintenance. <b7> Marty--re-draft 1.3.4, 1.3.5, 1.3.6 and bring to next meeting. <b7> Marty and Don--review the math underlying the BAWG acreage calculations to make sure we understand them (by next meeting). Old Action Items <b7> Tony--button up with Laura re special plants cost estimate <b7> Tony--in consultation with Gene and Laura, put together a preliminary scope and budget for beneficial plant in drawdown zone test--float to working group by e-mail--by 8/15. <b7> Don--make estimate for goat thing planning and implementation (by November) <b7> Tony--Call September meeting with Marty, Carl, Laura and Laurel to finish discussing noxious weed PME. <b7> Marty--After Tony and Laura have reviewed your re-drafted rare plant PME, send out to group before next meeting (8/21) <b7> Marty--Re 1.3.3 (Riparian Cavity Dwellers), use Bruce M's earlier snag model and use PHS guidance--propose to group snag management guidance document (by September) Notes from RESOLVE Meetings To permit the greatest degree of open dialogue, the group agreed that notes for the RESOLVE sessions will be less formal than regular working group meetings. We will primarily document agreements and action items. RESOLVE Groundrules and Criteria Following are the original RESOLVE ground rules agreed to by the working group: <b7> Work at understanding one another. <b7> Use airtime wisely. <b7> Speak honestly and respectfully. <b7> Examine assumptions. <b7> Make tentative agreements, then look at the whole package together. <b7> One meeting review rule: we have one meeting to review and change the tentative agreements of the previous RESOLVE session.1 <b7> Document our agreements. 1 All agreements are tentative even after the "one meeting review rule". However, the one meeting rule gives regular participants an opportunity to bring an agreement back to the table while assuring that tentative agreements are not forever reopened. It also accommodates regular participants who must miss a meeting and may want to weigh in on a decision. The group also agreed that materials to be considered at the RESOLVE session would be sent out in advance, per regular working group rules, if group members were expected to attempt agreement on those materials. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group Page 2 of 5   <b7> Caucuses are okay. <b7> For each PME, we will begin by identifying the goal and measurable objectives <b7> We will use the 5/7/03 PME's, as updated, for our RESOLVE discussion. <b7> After we have agreed to a PME, Marty will revise it to reflect our agreement. Only after that will draft settlement language be written. July 17th Agreements The group confirmed its tentative agreement on the following PME's (as contained in the 7/29/03 draft PMEs): <b7> 1.1.3 Late-seral Forest Habitat; <b7> 1.2.3 Mountain goat Summer Habitat Enhancement <b7> 1.3.1 Osprey Nest Structures When Gene Stagner joined the group later in the meeting, the group decided, by consensus, to delete 1.1.2, Beneficial Reservoir Vegetation. The group held a more detailed discussion about 1.3.2 and reached the following tentative agreements. 1.3.2 Loon Floating Nest Platforms Agreements <b7> Marty will re-draft the article to clarify PSE's maintenance responsibilities. <b7> Regarding terminating the program if it is not successful after 15 years (See "Description of Action")--where nests are successful, they will be continued. "Success" is judged based on breeding attempts. The group held a more detailed discussion about 1.3.4, 1.3.5 and 1.3.6 and reached the following tentative agreements. 1.3.4 Bald Eagle Management on Non-Project Lands Agreements <b7> In # 3) under "Description of Actions", specify that compensation will go for trees in excess of government rules and not to offset the cost of what they're already required to do. 1.3.5 Bald Eagle Management on Project Lands Agreements--Okay as is Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group Page 3 of 5   1.3.6 Bald Eagle Monitoring Agreements <b7> The survey discussed under "Description of Action" will look at known sites and has some level of effort to find new ones. <b7> The report from the surveys go to the BRCC and the Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group. Acreage Issue Discussion of Interests At the 8/8/03 meeting, the group had begun to discuss interests. At that meeting, PSE had stated two interests. They were: <b7> Certainty--knowing what the economic costs of the measures will be <b7> Profitability--not merely overall profitability but need to meet "prudent" test by WUTC At the 8/21/03 meeting, we picked up from where we left off. PSE added one interest with respect to acreage: <b7> Need to be able to sell the "reasonableness" of this measure internally Following were other interests around the table: NPS--As part of the BAWG, we want to see lost acreage mitigated for. USFS: <b7> Mitigate for continuing impacts to wildlife habitat <b7> Contribute to Natural Resources health in a balanced way <b7> Conduct business in a way that fosters confidence and trust among USFS stakeholders Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation <b7> Fear of continued development encroaching further on wildlife habitat. Wildlife habitat is going fast. Other BAWG interests: <b7> Replace the habitat lost by project through PSE or some other entity that could set a direction resulting in saving/improving habitat <b7> Maintain natural biodiversity of the area Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group Page 4 of 5   <b7> Make sure that the effects of the project on wilderness are monitored over time Agreements <b7> BAWG will meet to refine and prioritize its acreage needs and identify the amount of protection needed for various acreages. <b7> PSE will convert its February proposal into a dollar amount. <b7> Together, at the next meeting, we'll see if we can come up with a dollar amount that covers the needs. Then, we can develop a plan based on that amount. Summary of current agreements <b7> 1.1.1--need to determine acreage to get agreement <b7> 1.1.2--deleted by consensus <b7> 1.1.3--tentative agreement <b7> 1.2.1--need to determine acreage <b7> 1.2.2--preliminary tentative agreement but need to determine acreage to complete <b7> 1.2.3--preliminary tentative agreement but need to determine acreage to complete <b7> 1.2.4--need to determine acreage <b7> 1.2.5--need to determine acreage <b7> 1.3.1--tentative agreement <b7> 1.3.2--tentative agreement <b7> 1.3.3--Preliminary tentative agreement <b7> 1.3.4-1.3.6--tentative agreement <b7> 1.4.1--tentative agreement <b7> 1.4.2--will have Teamlet meeting in September to complete <b7> 1.5.1--still need to discuss <b7> 107--Breeding Birds--new PME--will be brought to the 9/30/03 meeting and discussed at subsequent RESOLVE session Agenda for next meeting <b7> Review agenda, notes and action items <b7> Review agreements from 8/21/03 meeting o Language changes on 1.3.2, 1.3.4 and 1.3.6 o Updates on others (1.4.2 teamlet meeting) <b7> Acreage o BAWG priorities and needs o PSE proposal costs o How far apart are we? How should we proceed to get agreement? Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group Page 5 of 5    2003terrestrial20030821.pdf en 