BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group Meeting January 16, 2003 (8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m.) (Bring Sack Lunch) U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Office, Room 261 510 Desmond Dr. S.E. Lacy, WA 98503 360-753-4126 (Gene Stagner) Conference Call Line: 1-866-280-6429, code 144995# (Please tell Tony or Lyn if you plan to call into meeting) AGENDA Review notes/revise agenda/action items PME Matrix Development <ad> update <b7> Recreational Impacts Discussion Solution Team Update Report on Studies: <b7> Status of existing studies: T2, T4, T5, T7 and T7b, T11, T13, T15, T16, T17 New Study Plans: <b7> T6 Noxious Weeds, T12 Grizzly Bear, T19 HEP, T21 Elk Update by PDEA contractor How are we going to evaluate our data? Assess accuracy of data? <b7> Planning for this discussion during next month's meeting. New Study Requests? Teamlet meetings? Confirm February location (Mount Vernon) and agenda, meeting location/dates for March, April Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group January 16, 2003 8:30 a.m. <ad> 2:00 p.m. US Fish & Wildlife Service Office 510 Desmond Drive S.E. Lacy WA 98503 360-753-4126 (Gene Stagner)  FINAL MEETING MINUTES Mission: "To develop alternative solutions and recommendations, addressing terrestrial and wildlife resource interests for the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement that: <b7> accurately defines and describes the existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; <b7> identifies project effects (existing and proposed) leading to development of protection, mitigation, and enhancement options."  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs, (Phone) 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  ATTENDEES Bob Nelson, (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation), Gene Stagner (U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service), Tony Fuchs and Cary Feldmann (Puget Sound Energy), Lauri Vigue (Washington Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Laura Potash, Don Gay, and Carl Corey (USFS), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental for the Louis Berger Group), Tom Hamer (Hamer Environmental), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Ron Tressler (EDAW), Robert Kuntz (National Park Service), Bruce Freet, by phone, (Environmental Agreements), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting)  SCHEDULE FOR FUTURE WORKING GROUP MEETINGS Regular meetings: Feb 20 (Mt. Vernon), March 20, April 17, May15, June 19 (location?), July 17, Aug. 21 (location?), Sept. 18, Oct.16, Nov.20 (location?)  CONFERENCE CALL LINE: ALL WERE REMINDED, ESPECIALLY DURING THESE WINTER MONTHS, THAT THE CONFERENCE CALL LINE WILL BE OPEN DURING ALL THESE MEETINGS. PLEASE CALL 1-866-280-6429 AND ENTER PARTICIPANT CODE: 144995 #. Let Lyn know before the meeting starts if you are calling in (call her at 425-890-3613).  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1 of 10   AGENDA FOR JANUARY 16, 2003 MEETING FWS office in Lacey, Washington 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. Bring a sack lunch and we'll work through! 1. Introductions 2. Review notes/agenda/action items 3. PME Matrix development <b7> Recreation Impacts Discussion 4. Solution Team Update 5. Study Plans <ad> T12, T-21, T-19, T-5 6. New Requests? 7. Assessing the accuracy/evaluation of our data: Plan for Discussion of this as sole topic at our Feb. mtg. 8. Report on existing studies 9. Set Agenda for February 20, 2003 <b7> Sole topic: Interpretations from data in Study Reports 10. Evaluate meeting  NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> Marty: Review the new PME matrix (first and second column for consistency, third and fourth columns for accuracy; fifth column look for conflicts/synergies and consistency with/existing land use plans) and get feedback to members and Bruce. <b7> ALL: Review Marty's draft of PME matrices (Terrestrial/Aquatics/Recreation) and get him feedback by February 17 (week prior to our February 24th meeting. <b7> ALL: Send Marty any changes to PME drafts by February 26. <b7> ALL: Send Marty T7b comments by January 24. Marty will send responses, have discussions and we will discuss at our February meeting. He will outline unresolved issues for us to discuss at our February meeting. <b7> ALL: Gave Kathy input re: terrestrial interests related to the HYDROPS model. <b7> ALL: Review Cook proposal for assistance with elk study and get feedback to Ron by January 30. <b7> ALL: Review elk study plan from Ron for discussion at our February meeting. <b7> Ron T: Do analysis species assessment for elk. <b7> Ron: Talk with Chris Madsen re: elk study. <b7> Ron: Send out Elk Study Plan for our review by February 10. <b7> Marty: Draft outline for Recreation Impacts Discussion (Don and Lauri will review). <b7> Marty: Check into validity of data coverages for T-15. Specifically, check stand age data (DNR has data all clumped together). <b7> Ron: Combine telemetry data from Lori Anderson (Farrow) and NWIFC into a format for plotting in the T15 map, and provided that information to R2 for plotting. <b7> Kathy: Get update species lists from agencies (in March '03?) <b7> Laura: Get Kathy known basin rare plant information by the end of January 2003. <b7> Ron: Work with Joetta (R2) re: road seasonal closures, etc. Use road layer (federal roads) as advised by Don.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2 of 10   <b7> ALL: Review elk study plan from Ron for discussion at out February meeting. <b7> Ron: Meet with Don re: cover type requirements for Grizzly. <b7> Ron: Write up Grizzly Study Plan to distribute at our February 20 meeting. <b7> Marty: By February 10, send out table of 5 ft. contour intervals of drawdown vegetation gains. <b7> Tony: Estimate size of cliff/talus on East shore of Baker Lake. <b7> Tom: Have Erin contact Ann re: T16. <b7> Tom: Have Erin write up species analysis report for Yellow Sedge and its interaction with Reed Canary Grass by April. <b7> Tony: Post T13 to the web and notify members by email. <b7> Tony: Post T15 map on R-2's FTP site and let members know when it is there. <b7> Tony: Include driving directions with the Agenda for the next meeting.  REPORT ON HEP ACTION ITEMS <b7> Marty/Joetta: Will finish the T7b study as quickly as possible. <b7> Gene: Followed up on Gulf Maine HEP study to see what we can adopt to use in or process- Sent all link to website. <b7> Lauri: Shared models/species used from Skagit relicensing with teamlet members. <b7> Marty: Shared same from Jackson Project on Sultan River. <b7> Lauri: Sent Don data re: remaining bird species tied to deciduous forests, also send him the pond breeding amphibian model. <b7> Don: Asked Bob Kuntz to look at models and literature searches about using red-eyed vireo and yellow warbler. <b7> Tom: Contact Mary Byrum re: USFS administrative Elk Study telemetry data and other wildlife layers for Ron.  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Came ready to discuss the preliminary working draft that Marty put together for T7b. <b7> ALL: Let Ron know if you wanted him to send you a .pdf file of the updated telemetry map he showed at our November meeting. <b7> Don/Tony: Settled on location for our Feb. 20 meeting. It will be at the PSE Office in Mt. Vernon on 1700 College Way). Tony will include driving directions with the Agenda for the meeting. <b7> Tony: Sent out notification email when T15 coverages are ready for review (December 24). <b7> Marty: Checked into the validity of data coverages for T-15. <b7> Lyn: Updated Norms to remind members to silence cell phones and requirement that Tom Hamer share any comments that participants make with them before he distributes them. <b7> Tony: Got Ron out to "see the sights" on January 30. <b7> Tony: Called Russ Paul (Crown Pacific) re: PME participation (January). Russ wants to be part of the solution. We will meet with him when we have a list put together of things we might want to do on Crown Pacific land. He then will take the list of suggestions to the Board. He seemed very open to collaborating with us. <b7> Tony: Pulled together teamlet to discuss next steps in wetland study (early January). <b7> Patrick: Brought photos from his trip to France. <b7> R2: Did initial assessment of potential recreation impacts to elk by overlaying a map of hiking trails in the basin on the T15 basin vegetation map. They applied buffers of width accepted by the teamlet in  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3 of 10   all areas where the trails cross forage habitat. (Ron distributed a table of proposed buffer distances for trails an other recreation-related entities.) <b7> Tony: Gave recreational-related buffer table to Joetta to include as a layer on T-15 map. <b7> Ron: Will combine telemetry data from Lori Farrow and NWIFC into a format for plotting in the T15 map, and provide that information to R2 for plotting. <b7> Tony: Looked at state-wide mortality study to see if it includes numbers for the Nooksack herd. No mention was made of the herd. <b7> Tony: Sent Ron map that shows developed and dispersed camping, roads and trails, along with spreadsheet indicating recreational use at those sites. <b7> Tony: Followed up with Frank re: local data for analysis species. He has collected data which he will be trying to prioritize with help from Tom and Tony. <b7> Tony: Got Marty to prioritize list of analysis species. <b7> Tony/Marty: Before our January meeting, got with Don to determine what consultant could help with Grizzly Study Plan (and eventually also do the study). They decided to ask Ron Tressler. Ron agreed to do this. <b7> Marty: Asked Ron T. to do species analysis for elk. <b7> Tony: Set up T-5 teamlet to meet in January (conference call with Lauri). <b7> Tony: Told Tom re: UTM errors on rare plant maps need to be fixed. Erin is working on this. <b7> Tony: Set up HP teamlet meeting for January 15, 2003 <b7> Tony: Updated and distributed a participant contact list.:  PME MATRIX Bruce walked us through matrices of the PMEs being considered by each of the Working Groups. Marty will review this, make edits, and send it out for our review prior to our February meeting.  SOLUTION TEAM UPDATE The Solution Team spent a lot of time discussing the legal mandates around flood control. The assumptions we will use around flood control will be addressed by the Economics Working Group meeting. Keith Brooks of FERC is also putting together a description of FERC's interpretation of the law as it related to the new license.  They also discussed an approach to adaptive management and the settlement team.  They are looking at adding a half-day plenary session to the March 5 and 6 workshop at the Cottontree Inn in Mt. Vernon. This would take place during the afternoon of the 4th. The purpose of this session would be for representatives of each of the resource area Working Groups to briefly describe the PMEs they are considering. Ideally, the next two days would be attended by a smaller group. The purpose of the workshop would be to identify how to resolve conflicting PMEs between working groups and well as look for opportunities to synergize. For this to happen, all groups will have received copies of the preliminary drafts of each of the PMEs from each Working Group in January.  NEW STUDIES: T 21: ELK STUDY Ron reported that he is nearing completion of analysis species for elk. We will be piggy backing on the Cook/Benders elk study. Ron has been spending time outlining the process. John Cook sent a proposal to  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4 of 10   Marty outlining an overall schedule to do the GIS work, process the vegetation clipping samples. This work could be complete by mid to late June, at the earliest. Marty will send out the proposal for working group members to review. Cook et al, would do all the modeling- starting with what they had for their study area. Stand age will be the major predictor for their model, along with vegetation types. Then they will expand their study to include our study area. Ron would assist them with GIS work and any legwork/sampling that needs to be done. Ron will put together a draft Study Plan and get it out for review by February 10th.  T-12: GRIZZLY SPRING FORAGING HABITAT VALUE Ron reported that since last week, he has given considerable thought to this Study. He suggests we use the data from T2 (Vegetation Mapping in Project Area) and T5 (Wetland Inventory Study) Studies, combined with the stand data from the Cook Study and evaluate this against the types of vegetation Grizzly's like to eat. The focus of the study is other than coniferous forested areas. Don suggested that we would likely need to augment the existing cover type data. Don thinks the percentage cover will be sufficient, as opposed to weight, in all non-conifer types. Don and Ron will work this out. We will see the initial Study Plan at our February 20 meeting.  T-6: NOXIOUS WEEK ASSESSMENT/CONTROL PLAN The Final Study Plan is nearly complete. Tom will run it by Laura for review next week.  T-19: HABITAT EVALUATION STUDIES Lauri reported that the teamlet met and decided that a HEP would make sense as part of a management plan/PME for monitoring management activities and future project lands. We will also look at combining information from the T4 analysis species and T7b mapping studies as a reference for determination of potential project effects. Don suggested we look at 5' contour slices in reservoir levels to help us identify runs for the HYDROPs model.  REPORT ON STUDIES See table below for updates on: T2 & 5, 4, 6, 7, 7b, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17.  Study # T2 T4  Title Vegetation Mapping in Project Area Analysis Species Assessment  Notes/Next Steps This has been combined with T5 for final summary report. Tom reported that he had gotten considerable input on these species especially re: local information. Tony distributed a draft-prioritized list for our review. We added Big Brown Bat, Bald Eagle, Marbled Murrelet, Yellow Sedge, MacGillivray's Warbler, Pileated Woodpecker and Northern Spotted Owl, to the list. Tom will complete the prioritized list by our February 20 meeting. We will separate wetland from riparian as they are two distinct habitat types. In our quest for complete information Tom will cross check our biblio-online search with the Birds of North America  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5 of 10   T5 T6 T7 T7b T-9,10 T11  Wetland Inventory Study Noxious Weed Assessment and Control Plan Historic Vegetation of the UB and LB Projects Future vegetation mapping Recreation use, effects on Mt. Goat Habitat use Oregon Spotted Frog Inventory  accounts. We also need to ensure the citings are correct (e.g., "maximum life span" being represented as "life span"). There should also be consistency with referencing locations (WA State Breeding Bird Atlas). This is combined with T-2. Maps are available for review. All have until January 24 for Study Plan review. The final product here is a summary of the cover types and maps. At our January meeting, we will discuss how we'd like to slice and dice the data. Next Steps will be including summaries of field experience, rare plants, unique habitat, more detailed descriptions of cover types, etc. This information will be appended to the final report. The Wetland Monitoring Teamlet Report: We would monitor potential enhancement sites prior to doing anything. We feel like we have sufficient data on project effects from T2, T5, T7b. The Final Study Plan is nearly complete. Tom will run it by Laura for review next week. The final report will be posted to the web. Marty will bring hard copies to the February meeting. Marty is incorporating comments into the report. Outstanding Areas to be Addressed: (1) List of habitat types changes midway through, (2) Future assumptions re: nonfederal lands at Baker Lake, (3) Growth and yield model and local application of the model, (4) Look at assumptions around disturbance in flood zone, (5) No difference shown in differences in herbicide applications on federal/non-federal lands, (6) New campgrounds and trails relative to ACS, NWFP, (7) There are some typos and math errors to be corrected. Marty will look at cross-referencing spread sheets to the text. Don has drafted a PME for our review with regard to mountain goats. We will address this issue there. Tom reported that all surveys were completed, according to the protocol developed by Dr. John Applegarth of the Bureau of Land Management. In addition, a one-day training was provided to our crews by WDFW Oregon spotted frog expert Kelly McAllister. All survyes were completed during the additional restricted season of sampling (15 July <ad> 15 September) suggested by Marc Hayes of the WDGW since all our surveys were conducted between 7 August and 13 September. Marc Hayes would have wanted to see three instead of two visits to each of the 23 sites since the site is in  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6 of 10   R-T12 Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging Habitat Value  the northern portion of the range of this species and the percent of time animals spend at the surface is lower than at sites further south. Our two visits to each site averaged just under 7 hours each so that the time spent sampling at each site was likely adequate. Another consideration is the sampling time of day. We did our sampling between 10:00 and 4:00 according to the Applegarth protocol. Marc would have liked to have seen a 13:00 to 17:00 sampling period for this site at the northern part of the range. Although all of these suggestions are valuable and could have been implemented, none of these modifications to existing protocol were suggested to us by Kelly or Marc during the field training or development of the study plan. Marc mentioned that some of these suggested protocol modifications were available in an electronic document he developed several years ago, but he could not find the document before we started the surveys and still has not had success in finding the information. The last suggestion by Marc suggested we may have spent field time dip-netting in areas that were not preferred Oregon spotted frog habitat <ad> i.e. areas with little emergent vegetation or where the vegetation structure was not suitable. Dip netting was concentrated in areas of emergent vegetation as documented in the final report and as suggested in the protocol. In addition, all optimal sites were surveyed in the study area (based on the presence of emergent vegetation) not just a sample of sites. In addition, the entire margins of each pond and marsh were sampled, not just portions of them. We do not think Marc understood these aspects of our sampling approach. It would have been helpful to have had Marc review this study plan before we did the field work. We agreed that Tom will attach Marc and Kelly's comments, along with Tom's explanations of how these concerns were/were not addressed to the report and pursue other action in the form of a PME. Ron reported that since last week, he has given considerable thought to this Study. He suggests we use the data from T2 (Vegetation Mapping in Project Area) and T5 (Wetland Inventory Study) Studies, combined with the stand data from the Cook Study and evaluate this against the types of vegetation Grizzly's like to eat. The focus of the study is other than coniferous forested areas. Don suggested that we will likely need to augment the existing cover type data. Don thinks the percentage cover will be sufficient , as opposed to weight, in all non-conifer  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 7 of 10   T13 T15 T16 T17 R-T18 R-T19 RT20 RT21 RT22  Survey and Manage Terrestrial Mollusk Survey Basin Vegetation Mapping Project Area Rare Plant Survey Amphibian Studies in Reservoir Fluctuation Zone Breeding Bird Surveys Habitat Evaluation Studies Wildlife Use in the Reservoir Drawdown Zone Elk studies Fluctuation Zone Enhancement  types. Don and Ron will work this out. We will see the initial Study Plan at our February 20 meeting. The final report is complete. It will be posted to the relicensing website. This map, (including cover types, wetland and seral stage information) is now available. Tony will post it on R-2's FTP site and let members know when it is there. All comments have been incorporated The draft of the Final Report will be out the week of January 20. Tom will run it by Laura first. Tom reported he is reorganizing the data from this study to bring out the specific data needs expressed by team members to help them develop PMEs. Figures will be re-done to show the habitat type or cover type at each sample site by season. In addition, a table will be developed to show all habitat types sampled, the total number of habitat types available to sample in the project area, and the percent actually sampled so we can see the range and intensity of each cover type sampled. A second Figure will show each amphibian found, a unique symbol will show the life stage found, and a unique record number next to the location will tie back to a master table described below. A master Table will be a summary of each location record including data about the record (date, season, etc.) but also all the habitat information available for that record. Another table will summarize all the habitat data separately for each amphibian species. By the 3rd week of February, Tom will work with Don, Lauri, Tony and Gene to write a proposal for gathering additional information (e.g. amount of reproduction loss in and out of the drawdown zone). It would be helpful to keep possible PME activities in mind during additional field work. Combine with T-19. See T19 discussion above. PSE will do it on its own and share the data. See elk discussion above. We will go forward with this as part of a PME.  New Study Plans: T12-Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging Habitat Value T21-Elk Studies  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 8 of 10   UPDATE BY PDEA CONTRACTOR The EA team is working on the draft outline for the EA and will make that available to the Team Leads as soon as it has been reviewed and approved by the Solutions Team. Wildlife and botanical information from the Project vicinity is being compiled and updated for use in the Existing Conditions section of the document. Preliminary HYDROPS model runs are expected to be performed in the near future; the Stetson Group will provide results of their review of the model to the Solutions Team next week. ASSESSING THE ACCURACY/EVALUATION OF OUR DATA We will address this topic at our next meeting, February 20th (see agenda below). HANDOUTS (Those that will be posted to the website are bolded.) <b7> DRAFT for Cross Resource Workshop, March 2003, Terrestrial Resources Working Group, Baker River Hydroelectric Project No. 2150 <ad> Cross Resource Matrices for TRWG meeting from Bruce and June Freet PARKING LOT <b7> Conceptual Mitigation Approach (PMEs) <b7> Review time frame/goals of working groups/milestones <b7> Definitions of "project boundary", "project effects", "previous environment", "project area", NEPA definitions <b7> Watershed Analysis Presentation <b7> Land Management <ad> Do study? <b7> Make list of all available relevant data. Create a subset of those data for Tony to always bring to meetings for group to continually reference. <b7> Are transmission lines in or out of FERC boundary? <b7> Changing Climate Patterns <b7> Determine land management allocations within Project boundary <b7> Interface with Access Management Plan <b7> Come up with optimal reservoir operation scenario(s) from Terrestrial perspective (HYDROPs) <b7> Set up "face to face" meetings with Russ Paul to review our proposals MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones <b7> Great participation <b7> Good problem solving <b7> Good energy <b7> Tom talked as fast as Lyn Opportunities to Improve <b7> Finished late (5 min.) <b7> More food next time. WHAT'S HOT? <b7> Data analysis  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 9 of 10   STUDIES STATUS FOR SOLUTION TEAM <b7> We are getting to a point where we can begin to analyze data (February meeting). <b7> We are pretty much finished with all of the original studies <b7> We are making good progress <ad> concerned that the PME process (though it was helpful as it "got the guts out") has slowed our progress. <b7> Scrambling to get new studies going in time for PDEA <b7> Agreed on HEP, Elk, Grizzly Bear approaches TENTATIVE AGENDA for our February 20, 2003 Meeting PSE Office in Mount Vernon, Washington 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. 1. Bring a sack lunch and we'll work through! 2. Introductions 3. Review notes/agenda/action items 4. Studies: (Do Vegetation first!) 5. Assess sufficiency of data <b7> What conclusions can we draw? <b7> Analysis methods <b7> What are additional (data needs?) <b7> How might we collect it? <b7> What additional analysis needs? <b7> PME refinement (as next step) 6. Confirm location and set agenda for our March 20,2003 meeting 7. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 1/16/2003 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 10 of 10    2003terrestrial20030116.pdf en 