 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting for Botanical Resources June 7, 2005 (9:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m.) U.S. Forest Service Office - Library 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-800-582-8948, code *0529465* (Please tell Tony (425-462-3553) if you plan to call into meeting) AGENDA Review notes/agenda/action items from April 27th meeting Review draft management plan outlines for proposed botanical license articles: Article 509, Special Status Plant Management Plan 1. Revised project initiation form for review and discussion 2. Revised draft annotated outline of plan 3. Draft outline of site-specific management plans for Ivy and Tansy Ragwort Article 508, Noxious Weed Management Plan 1. Revised prioritization forms, prioritization discussion 2. Revised draft annotated outline of plan 3. Discuss feedback from TRIG meeting 4. Discussion of goals and objectives for reed canarygrass sites Article 510, Carex flava Management Plan 1. Discussion of funding mechanisms 2. Revised draft annotated outline of plan Set date and agenda for next meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Technical Meeting for Botanical Resources June 7, 2005 9:00am until Noon U.S. Forest Service Office - Library 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-800-582-8948, code *0529465* (Please tell Tony (425-462-3553) if you plan to call into meeting) FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT AT MEETING Laura Potash (USFS), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates), Laurel Shiner (Whatcom County Noxious Weed Control Board) Agenda Article 509, Special Status Plant Management Plan Revised project initiation form for review and discussion Revised draft annotated outline of plan Article 508, Noxious Weed Management Plan Revised prioritization forms, prioritization discussion Revised draft annotated outline of plan Discuss feedback from TRIG meeting Review revised English ivy and new tansy ragwort plans Set date, place, agenda for the next TRIG botanical teamlet meeting New Action Items Tony will make copies of the MBS Weed EA Decision Notice and return original to Laura. Tony will contact the Carex working group and Tom Kaye regarding contracted work for Carex flava license article. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG botanical teamlet meeting, June 7, 2005 Page 1 of 3 Tony and Kathy will develop a recommendation for language in section B.2.4 of the IWMP (prior to July 20 TRIG meeting if Carl Corey can attend). Kathy will make a copy/order a copy of the S&M species survey protocol document and return original to Laura. Laura will check with Carl Corey to see if he is available to attend the July 20 TRIG meeting. Laura will prepare a crosswalk of PSE ID codes with USFS ID codes for weed sites. Report on old Action Items Tony made copies of the April 2005 MBS Weed EA and returned original to Laura. Laurel provided density ranking information for infested sites to Kathy. Laura provided contact name(s) for the Carex working group to Tony and Kathy. Kathy provided draft language in SSPMP section B.3.5 for what do we do if we can’t avoid a rare plant when conducting a ground disturbing project. Tony to contact Steve Jennison about WDNR contact for the SSPMP and C. flava plans review Tony to review potential for impact of anchor points for the FSC project, to determine need for rare plant survey, and get back to Laura on it. It was agreed that Tony and Laura will conduct a rare plant survey of the site this summer at the appropriate timing. Tony will set up meeting with Steve Reutebach from the USFS PNW Research Office to determine the process for contacting though the FS, and the associated overhead costs. Meeting Discussion Article 509: We went over the updated Project Initiation forms and provided comments to Kathy. Laura suggested adding a recommendation to use digital oblique photos when possible to show the location of proposed project features/activities. Tony noted that additions may be made to the form to make it useful for a cultural resources screening tool. The SSPMP outline was reviewed again, with specific comments. Revised language for section B.3.2, new parcels, was suggested to clarify that evaluation only needs to be performed when ground-disturbing or vegetation clearing activity is proposed. Also, the specific USFS review steps do not need to be called out. Article 508: Laurel joined the meeting for the discussion of Article 508. The team reviewed and tested the prioritization scheme for all species and for known sites of tansy ragwort and English ivy. It was agreed that butterfly bush should be dropped from the target species list and prioritization scheme, for now, as it is not present in the project area. Laura recommended adding a description of the prioritization process to the IWMP and adding under the ‘Prevention’ heading an annual ID training for field staff. We reviewed the updated draft outline of the Integrated Weed Management Plan. It was agreed that Section B.2.4 regarding newly acquired parcels will require further discussion between PSE and Don Gay, Carl Corey, and other interested parties. The USDA-FS suggested wording appears to be in conflict with the license article language. Tony and Kathy will provide a suggested revision for discussion at the July 20 TRIG meeting. Don is not available to attend the July 20 meeting. If Carl Corey cannot attend that meeting, the discussion will be scheduled for another date. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG botanical teamlet meeting, June 7, 2005 Page 2 of 3 Kathy presented drafts of the English ivy and tansy ragwort management plans. Suggestions included adding the USDA-FS site ID codes in addition to the PSE codes, and using a Revegetation subheading for each treatment plan to describe the mulch and/or revegetation recommendations. Other: Tony and Kathy will be relocating rare plant sites in June. We will try to schedule field visits to weed and rare plant sites, as requested by teamlet members, later in the summer. Laura noted the importance of planning ahead for needed native plant seed and rooted stock. There is not a specific license article that addresses the propagation steps. Next Meeting The next meeting will be on August 8th at the USFS Mountlake Terrace office. Tony will send out the notice and agenda. We will be reporting on the action items and look at updated site prioritization rankings, new species management plans, and hopefully feedback from the July 20th TRIG meeting. Handouts Draft Project Initiation Form, Baker River Project Updated draft outline, Special Status Plant Management Plan (SSPMP) Draft prioritization forms for species and selected sites Draft outline, Integrated Weed Management Plan USFS suggested revisions to Section B.2.4 of IWMP Draft English ivy and tansy ragwort management plans Agenda for next Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Botanical Teamlet Meeting August 8th, 2005 at PSE Mount Vernon business office 9:00 a.m. - Noon Nutritious snacks (or not!) will be provided. 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from June 7th meeting. 2. Provide update on action items 3. Review updated draft outlines and determine next steps in development of draft plans 4. Discuss feedback from TRIG meeting 5. Evaluate meeting and set agenda and location for next meeting Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG botanical teamlet meeting, June 7, 2005 Page 3 of 3  