BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting May 20, 2005 11:30 a.m.<ad>3:00 p.m. Annie's Pizza, Concrete, WA  MEETING NOTES Mission: "To develop implementations and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project Relicense".  Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jessie.piper@pse.com PRESENT: Jessie Piper and Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Kelly Bush (Equinox Research & Consulting), Ron Kent (US Army Corps of Engineers), Jan Hollenbeck (U.S. Forest Service), Bob Mierendorf (National Park Service), Steve Jennison (DNR), Ken Juell (Northwest Archaeological Associates), John and Gail Boggs (Concrete Heritage Museum Association), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and Mary Jean Wiltse, notetaker (PDSA Consulting, Inc.) FUTURE MEETING DATES <ad> 2005 September 22, with location and time to be announced. All regular attendees are encouraged to let Jessie know if they are unable to attend a meeting. INTRODUCTIONS We welcomed first-time attendee Steve Jennison from DNR to the team. NEW ACTION ITEMS Jessie and Connie: Find appropriate brief paragraph explaining 106 to use for our norms. ALL: Review membership list and let Jessie know of changes, also send her suggestions for folks to be put on interested persons list. Jessie: Update and distribute membership list. ALL: Norms....change/update on a continuing basis.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resources Advisory Group 05-20-05 Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   Jessie and Connie: Send out confidentiality paragraph for members to review. (The aim would be to include this in the Historical Properties Management Plan). Consider FOIA implications. ALL: By June 30, give Jessie feedback re: Maintenance Guidelines. Draft Agenda for May 20, 2005 Annie's Pizza, Concrete 1. Introductions 2. Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee 3. Norms for CRAG Meetings 4. Cultural Issues: Confidentiality 106 Quorum 5. Historic Properties Management Plan 6. Major Projects on the Horizon THE BAKER RIVER INTERIM COORDINATING COMMITTEE The last meeting was February 15. The Settlement Agreement was finished November, 2004. PSE then took "PMEs" from Settlement Agreement and put them in the draft license articles for FERC at the end of January. They discussed the structure, etc. for each of the working groups going forward. Many are already busy with early and pre-implementation initiatives. They are still awaiting the DEA from FERC. FERC announced it will miss the end of May deadline for this. There don't seem to be any major snags so we hope to receive the DEA from FERC sometime in June. The next BRICC meeting is scheduled for June 7. Issues to discuss include: 401 Water Quality Certification, SEPA, CZMA, permitting, flood control and the schedule for license issuance. PSE's current license expires April, 2006. FERC aims to issue the new license by the end of this year. CRAG NORMS/MEMBERSHIP/QUORUM We reviewed the membership rules outlined in the Historical Properties Management Plan and the quorum rules outlined in Article 601. We acknowledged that we won't always have Tribal or State/Federal agency representation at our meetings. We will operate at our meetings in accordance with Section 106. Implementation of 106 measures may take the form of mitigation. This would preclude a vote. Article 601 regulations would apply to the CRAG only in non-section 106 areas such as training, education, interpretation activities and other non 106 non confidential issues. We agreed to defer further discussion of the "voting issue" and quorum until after clarification from the Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee. Jessie will keep a membership list (as shown in the HPMP) and a separate list for contacts/interested parties. This list would morph/grow over time.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resources Advisory Group 05-20-05 Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   CONFIDENTIALITY Jessie distributed Section IV from the Baker River Communication Protocol for all to review. We agreed that, when we are able to revise the Historical Properties Management Plan, we will incorporate language to address confidentiality. Connie and Jessie will route around draft language prior to our next meeting. We will continue with our norm of not discussing confidential issues at open meetings.  HISTORICAL PROPERTIES MANAGEMENT PLAN Jessie announced that we need some foundational work done for our monitoring/treatment plan. Ken distributed a draft Archaeological Resources Condition Report form for our review. We discussed that the questions we use to monitor various properties will need to be site-specific. Reservoir drawdown has a major impact on sites. We also agreed that some form of monitoring will need to continue after any data recovery. We discussed the balance of quantitative and qualitative data to record in monitoring resource conditions. Ken reported that he noticed little change in site appearance over a two year period. Jessie reminded us that we need to have a testing plan developed by the time the license is issued. Jan let us know that since January 1, OAHP is no longer accepting USFS "site update" forms. We will re-visit this issue in the late fall after we have more data.  MAINTENANCE GUIDELINES FOR HISTORIC DISTRICT Jessie distributed a draft outline for all to review. She is interested in feedback re: the comprehensiveness of the outline. These guidelines are due at the time of license issuance.  MAJOR PROJECTS Jessie distributed a table showing major projects anticipated in 2005-06. She will update this over time.  HANDOUTS 1. Interim CRAG Member Contact List 2. Draft BRCC Meeting Norms (April 8, 2005) 3. CHRWG Norms (June 20, 2000) 4. Article 601 - BRCC 5. Confidentiality - Section IV from Baker River Communications Protocol 6. Draft Archaeological Conditions Form (Northeast Archaeological Associates) 7. BR Historic District Maintenance Guidelines Outline 8. Major Projects 2005-2006  PARKING LOT No items currently listed  MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones Great location and food! Nice to get together and discuss actual issues/what's happening! Nice to see John and Gail again! Nice to see Steve and Ken Good data/handouts from Jessie BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resources Advisory Group 05-20-05 Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   Changes for Next Time More chocolate Tribal representatives Missed Rob No phone TENTATIVE Agenda for next CRAG Meeting September 22, Time and Location to be announced. 1. Welcome and Introductions Review Action Items 2. Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee 3. Review/Finalize Norms for CRAG Meetings 4. Update on Cultural Issues: Confidentiality 106 Quorum 5. Historic Properties Management Plan 6. Status of Archaeological Surveys 7. Evaluate Meeting Define Next Steps  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resources Advisory Group 05-20-05 Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   Cultural Resources Advisory Group (CRAG) Description: This group has been established to address ongoing license implementation issues associated with cultural resources as they relate to the terms and conditions of the FERC license requirements for the Baker River Project. The work group membership includes federal and state agencies and tribes with cultural resources responsibilities. Mission Statements: To address ongoing license implementation issues as the licensee carries out the terms and conditions of the FERC license. Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil Puget Sound Energy E-mail: Elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com Phone: (425) 462-3609    2005crag20050520.pdf en 