BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting for Botanical Resources May 13th, 2005 (9:30 a.m. - 1:00 p.m.) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-800-582-8948, code *0529465* (Please tell Tony (425-462-3553) if you plan to call into meeting)  AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from March 2nd conference call 2. Discussion of the BRICC meeting on February 15, 2005 3. Presentation of draft BRICC Norms 4. Set up Norms and process for our TRIG group 5. Discussion of draft Terrestrial schedule 6. Review work/notes/action items from the Botanical Technical TRIG meeting. 7. Review TRMP outline, next steps 8. Land acquisition update 9. Other?  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   10. Evaluate meeting and set date and agenda for next meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Baker River Project License Implementation  Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes May 13, 2005 9:30 am - 1:00 pm  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Don Gay and Laura Potash (USFS); Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific); Cary Feldmann and Tony Fuchs (PSE); Lauri Vigue (WDFW); Fayette Krause (The Nature Conservancy); Bob Nelson (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates); Lauri Vigue (WDFW), Chris Madsen (NW Indian Fisheries Commission); Stan Walsh (SRSC), Jason Joseph by phone (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe); Lou Ellyn Jones in person and Gene Stagner by phone (USFWS); Lyn Wiltse, facilitator, and Jamie Merrifield, note-taker (PDSA Consulting, Inc). NEXT MEETING DATE Wednesday, July 20, form 9:00 to 2:00 at location to be determined. Tony will announce. AGENDA 9:30 – 9:45 9:45 – 10:00 10:00 – 10:15 10:15 – 10:30 10:30 – 10:45 10:45 – 11:15 11:15 – 11:35 11:35 – 11:50 11:50 – 12:20 12:20 – 12:30 12:30 – 1:00  Review Notes, Agenda, Action Items Review Feb. 15 BRICC Meeting Review Draft BRICC Norms Set Norms / Process for TRIG BREAK Review Notes from Botanical Tech. Teamlet Meetings Land Acquisition Update Discuss Terrestrial Schedule High-level Walk Through of TRMP Other? Q&A re: TRMP, Next Steps, Evaluate Mtg., Set next Meeting Date/Agenda  NEW ACTION ITEMS Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Meeting Notes, May 13, 2005  Page 1 of 4   • All – Send Tony any updates to list of TRIG reps. • Cary – If FERC doesn’t release DEA in near future, ask Connie to send out notice next week to • • • • • •  postpone June 7 BRICC Meeting. Lyn – See that draft TRIG norms are consistent with TRWG norms; send to Tony to review and distribute prior to next meeting. All – Let Kathy know if you have comments / suggested edits re: the Project Initiation Form. Kathy – Bring example of ‘pre-evaluation’ procedure for this group to consider (relative to the concern expressed about unnecessarily spending funds to develop a weed management plan). All – Review the outline of the Terrestrial Resource Management Plan, flag those chapters that you want to help draft, send comments to Marty by end of May. All – Let Tony know if you want to host the July 20 TRIG meeting. Tony – Send notification of meeting location in early July.  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Tony shared a high-level planning schedule with the group. • Kathy set up teamlet meetings to review outline and scope for botanical plans. • Marty prepared an annotated outline of the TRMP. • Tony invited Lyn to facilitate our initial meeting. UPDATE FROM FEB. 15 BRICC MEETING Jamie reviewed the next steps / action items from the BRICC (Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee) meeting. Their next meeting is tentatively scheduled for June 7, pending receipt of the Draft Environmental Assessment. If FERC doesn’t release the DEA in the next couple days, Connie will send out a postponement notice for this meeting. REVIEW DRAFT OF BRICC NORMS/SET TRIG NORMS Lyn walked the group through the draft BRICC norms. We discussed what edits we could want to make to those norms to make them appropriate for the TRIG. The initial items on the list are prescribed by the settlement and are therefore not up for modification. We agreed that the other norms we adopt for the TRIG should be consistent with our current norms. Cary made real-time adjustments to the norms document. He will send the edited version to Lyn who will ensure they are consistent with the TRWG norms and then forward them to Tony to review and send out to team members. BOTANICAL TECHNICAL TEAMLET UPDATE Kathy handed out draft botanical management plans (see handouts list), and updated us on activities re: noxious weeds, plants of special status, and Carex flava. PSE anticipates that it will file these plans with FERC within 6 months of license issuance. This teamlet has met several times to flesh out plans in these areas using the settlement language as a starting point (Teamlet has been attended by Laura Potash, Laurel Shiner, Tony Fuchs, Kathy Smayda, and Patrick Goldsworthy). In each, the ‘Overview of the Plan’ (unlikely to change, established by license articles) was listed separately from the ‘Procedures,’ which may change over time as deemed appropriate by the TRIG. Concern was expressed about clearly identifying the source of funding in each of these plans, which are subsets of the overall TRMP. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Meeting Notes, May 13, 2005  Page 2 of 4   Kathy distributed a draft Project Initiation Form that PSE plans to use as a screening process for potential resource issues. This form was based on a similar form used by the Forest Service. The question was raised as to what constitutes ‘habitat disturbing’ … what is the threshold? We decided to put this in the Parking Lot for now. We may use a similar form for wildlife/cultural issues as well. Laura will be the decision-maker on this for federal lands on the plant side; Don would be the person on the wildlife side. Tony reported that the Cultural Resources Group is also planning to use a similar form for ground disturbing activities. We will add wording to the IWMP to the effect that weed treatment will be decided by the TRIG on a site-specific basis. Concern was expressed about expending funds to develop treatment “plans” for acquisitions when we might not actually implement any treatment. Our intent is to balance due diligence with resource conservation. Kathy will bring a model to illustrate the level of work (funding) required to do this type of preliminary analysis. LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Tony reported that PSE is looking at partnering opportunities with the Skagit Land Trust and Rocky Mt. Elk Foundation (RMEF). The Skagit Land Trust folks would want to see a conservation easement on whatever lands would be purchased and that those easements would be in perpetuity (beyond the term of the license). They also wanted a cash endowment for management costs. These issues create limitations upon the partnership opportunities in this area. They may be able to help in a consulting capacity for future terrestrial / aquatic land acquisition. The first acquisition is elk related and RMEF has a solid reputation, making them a natural partner in the initial acquisitions. PSE met with RMEF on May 12 to discuss partnering on the parcel currently under review. They are fleshing out an MOU to describe how they might work together going forward. The aim is to have the MOU in place before Memorial Day weekend. TERRESTRIAL SCHEDULE Tony distributed a high-level draft overview of the schedule of plans and early implementation activities. He stressed that this schedule will be regularly updated and will include monitoring, enhancements, etc. Items in this schedule view are predicated on a January 2006 license issuance. Cary suggested that we could expect license issuance before mid-2006, and that we would adjust the schedule accordingly. TRMP OUTLINE Marty distributed an annotated outline of the Terrestrial Resource Management Plan. He emphasized that the goal here is to get agreement on the outline, what would be covered in each topic, etc. The outline includes things required in Settlement Agreement. Pertinent sections of the January Agency Draft Management Plan were also included. Each license article has its own chapters in the Outline, starting with Chapter 3. Chapters 8-10 are placeholders for the plant plans. Each chapter will include the verbatim wording of the license article and the settlement agreement. Marty suggests we have a separate appendix devoted to each parcel. On the next draft, Marty will focus on outline format / structure. Our aim is to have a draft of this plan completed by November of this year. Emphasis will be on those early implementation actions once the license is issued, including: elk habitat, osprey and loon structures, and botanical actions. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Meeting Notes, May 13, 2005  Page 3 of 4   OTHER Article 505 Aquatic Riparian Habitat Management Plan The final plan for this article is due within two years of license issuance. Tony will be working with Arnie Aspelund, team leader of the Aquatics Resource Group, on this and will keep us posted. PARKING LOT • What is our definition of threshold for ‘habitat disturbing?’ HANDOUTS • Agenda • TRIG March 2 Conference Call Meeting Notes • Draft BRICC Norms • Special Status Plant Management Plan, Draft Outline • Integrated Weed Management Plan, Draft Outline • Carex flava (Yellow sedge) Management Plan, Draft Outline • Project Initiation Form, Baker River Project • 2.4 Definitions (from WAC 16-750 for the Baker River IWMP) • Terrestrial Resource Management Plan, Annotated Outline • Botanical Teamlet Minutes & Draft Minutes (see Tony) MEETING EVALUATION What Went Well • Nice to see everyone’s faces • Laughter! • Stan jabs :) • Welcome to our new members, Fayette and Lou Ellyn (and Jason is new to terrestrial too!) • Got out early! What to Do Differently • Speak up for benefit of those participating by phone AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING July 20, 2005 at a centralized location TBA 9:00 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. 1. Review notes/agenda/action items 2. Review June BRICC Meeting Activities 3. Review / Finalize Draft TRIG Norms 4. Land Acquisition Update 5. Review Draft 2 of Terrestrial Resource Management Plan (TRMP) Outline and Structure 6. Establish teamlets and discuss substance development on TRMP 7. Other? 8. Evaluate meeting and set agenda and location for next meeting  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Meeting Notes, May 13, 2005  Page 4 of 4    2005trig20050513.pdf en 