 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting May 3rd, 2007 (9:00 p.m. - 2:00 p.m.) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 6461, Password: 4567 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 (c)) if you plan to call into meeting AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from March 1st, 2007 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? Any updates on WQC, 401, BiOp? 3. Osprey and Loon update 4. Elk Update Update from Elk Teamlet meeting “Initial Property” negotiations update 5. Botanical Teamlet Update from Botanical Teamlet meeting 6. Continue Chapter-by-Chapter TRMP Review (starting at Chapter 11) Unresolved issues? TRMP “finalization” plan 7. Other? 8. Evaluate meeting, set date and agenda for next meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes May 3, 2007 9:00 am - 2:00 pm USFS Mountlake Terrace FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Anna Kopitov, Cary Feldmann, (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Lou Ellyn Jones by phone (USFWS); Bob Kuntz (NPS); and Jamie Riche (PDSA Consulting). NEXT MEETING DATES TRIG: June 7, 2007, 9 am – 2 pm, Mtlk Terrace Future TRIG Meetings: July 5, Aug. 2, Sept. 6, Oct. 4, Nov. 1, Dec. 6 Elk Teamlet: TBD as needed, maybe a field trip? ACTION ITEMS Ray & Tony – Touch base with the new possible alternative property representation and schedule pre-acquisition review Tony - Send out the current TRMP (with caveats noted below) to all All - Review TRMP and bring concerns to June 7 TRIG meeting Tony - Ask Don for a summary or direction to a reference about the USFS mgmt plan Marty - When reformatting the TRMP for FERC, also collect the “rationale” sections from the older versions into one rationale document for future administrators Marty - Find and incorporate eagle night roost survey protocols (Ch. 12) PREVIOUS – STILL RELEVANT – ACTION ITEMS Marty – Ensure all land acquisition articles are consistent with Section 8 weed management language Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Final Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007 Page 1 of 4 Tony – Update Jacob re: Section 8 language agreement so he can ensure the draft plan is consistent Marty – Enlarge the PSE engineering specifications in Appendix 7.1 Tony / Anna – Resolve the Carex flava base mapping issue and send the final report to TRIG All – In reviewing the TRMP land acquisition sections; consider how to list primary and secondary decision criteria. Tony – Forward information about all potential land acquisition parcels to elk teamlet with a reminder about the need for confidentiality of all such information BRICC / LICENCE UPDATE Tony shared that the BRICC meeting April 25 was well attended. The group heard updates from all the resource groups (aquatics, recreational, cultural, and terrestrial), discussed timelines and the rationale behind initiating some of the settlement agreement activities early. PSE will bring a master timeline to the next BRICC meeting so all groups can coordinate activities and be involved in each others‟ projects as needed. The group also discussed at length the definition of quorum and agreed to ask PSE to send around an explanation of the “affinity model” as the BRICC‟s definition of quorum for review and affirmation of a shared definition of quorum at the next BRICC meeting. An additional factor which affects the ability to build a quorum is the funding limitation several of the signatory parties are facing; some critical members may not have the resources to continue to work on this project. Representation: Tony also passed around the resource group representation list for folks to review and update as needed. Lou Ellyn shared that she will be filling in for a colleague in Washington DC for the next few months … the work will be interesting, so we congratulated her and noted TEAMLET UPDATES Botanical Teamlet Anna and Kathy shared that the botanical teamlet met yesterday. They reviewed the TRMP‟s chapter 8 and discussed the need for a native plant propagation program. Both USFS and PSE will need specific local, native plants due to upcoming ground-disturbing projects; Laura will set up a meeting between USFS, PSE and WDFW to coordinate a plan (which projects, how many plants, when needed, current sources). Kathy noted that these plans will have implications for projects from the other resource groups (dismantling and restoring the spawning beaches, for example). The teamlet discussed where they are in the data analysis for weeds. For treatment purposes, the teamlet decided to group individual points into geographic areas. Kathy and Joetta will finish this process and coordinate PSE‟s data with the forest service and establish priorities for treatment. They also discussed which elements of the plan need to be actually “in” the plan, and which parts are more appropriately kept in procedures. They have scheduled another meeting June 4, 10 – 2 to continue … Laura is, by the way, one of the folks who is „out of budget‟ for Baker Relicensing project. As a key member of this teamlet, she will keep us apprised of her situation … we‟ll all stay tuned. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Final Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007 Page 2 of 4 Kathy and Marty discussed updates to the plant chapters and agreed that Kathy will “own” the plant chapters for now to avoid having multiple versions of the TRMP floating around. Osprey / Loon Teamlet Update: Tony shared that they‟ve monitored the new nesting sites. They have seen loons on Lk. Shannon, but not yet on the platform. There are, however, Osprey using many of their nest bowls – including the new one! Elk Teamlet Update: The Elk Teamlet continues to be very active. Property acquisition activity is really heating up; there are a lot of possibilities, including another possible alternate property the team can consider if needed. They met with Mike from WDFW in April to gain clarity on the Nooksack Elk Management Plan (which is being revised this summer), and the implications that has for land acquisition / land management. TRMP Review We discussed the review and development process and agreed that while we are collaboratively developing this document, we will continue the „in person‟ editing process so we can keep up our pace. If folks can‟t participate either in person or by phone, it is difficult to ensure their interest is represented in the editing process. We as a group will be careful to seek the input of agencies / representatives that have special interest and or regulatory authority in specific sections. Even though we aren‟t done yet, Tony will send out the TRMP in its current form to all TRIG members since many of our teammates haven‟t seen an updated version since December 2005. His email will liberally note that this current, annotated version does NOT include all the edits we have noted to date. Marty commented that he has noted some of the desired changes in the margins of his printed copy and so are not yet incorporated. Once we have made our way entirely through the document, Tony reminded us that there will be another formal review and input process. With Cary, we discussed FERC‟s likely expectation that each of these articles will have their own separate planning documents. Most of the TRMP‟s current chapters may need to be separate documents. We agreed to wait for license issuance to actually reorganize the document. This way we will know FERC‟s expectations – and we can keep our redlined version easier to follow pending this reformat. Marty will also create a list of the items (such as scheduling details) that we will need to adjust when we finalize this into the format FERC wants. We discussed the level of detail for our various documents. We want to be sure to include sufficient detail, particularly in regard to our process, guidelines and general methodologies in the TRMPs for the initial filings, while keeping the site-specific and species-specific plans separate to be filed as addenda. We agreed that what we submit to FERC will be called plans; the additional level of detail we need for our activities and annual reports will be called procedures for now so we have consistency throughout. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Final Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007 Page 3 of 4 Tony projected our current draft TRMP onto a screen and made live changes as we continued to walk through the document chapter by chapter, starting Chapter 11, Decaying and Legacy Wood. We agreed to ask Marty to rework this chapter to reflect our discussion about the intention of this chapter and the best way to coordinate this chapter with chapters 3, 4, and 5. For Chapter 12, Marty will gather and incorporate materials from previous discussions. We will start June 7 at Chapter 13. HANDOUTS Agenda TRIG April 20, 2007 Meeting Notes BRICC / resource group representation lists PARKING LOT Develop protocol for pre-acquisition field visit EVALUATION What went well: Analogies galore! Thank goodness for jumper cables Forage just keeps getting better (thanks, Marty!) Excellent (adequate?!) facilitation Brock & Jamie – Panther Chocolate Bar Brock‟s careful review – wins the „best prepared‟ award What to do differently: It really is time for a new conference phone AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING June 7, 2007, 9 am – 2 pm, Mountlake Terrace 1. Welcome, review notes, action items, agenda 2. BRICC / License Update 3. Elk, Loon / Osprey and Botanical Teamlet Updates (including Chapters 8, 9, and 10) 4. Continue Chapter-by-Chapter TRMP Review (starting at Chapter 13) 5. Other? 6. Evaluate meeting, set next meeting date and agenda Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Final Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007 Page 4 of 4  