BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting August 2nd, 2007 (9:00 p.m. - 2:00 p.m.) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 4505, Password: 4567 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 (c)) if you plan to call into meeting AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from July 5th, 2007 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? 3. Osprey, Loon and Botanical Team updates 4. Bald Eagle Delisting Update - Sally Implications to settlement articles? 5. "The Don Show" <ad> Updates on USFS plans for Articles 515, 516, 517 TRMP sections 5.16 to 5.18 review 6. Elk Update Easement Language, next steps - Ira Habitat Management Plan agreement process <ad> as part of Easement agreement 7. Continue Chapter-by-Chapter TRMP Review (as needed) Process for incorporation of all comments/edits to date - update TRMP "format reorganization" What's next? 8. Other? 9. Evaluate meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting (September 6th) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Baker River Project License Implementation  Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes August 2, 2007 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mountlake Terrace  FINAL MEETING NOTES  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  PRESENT Paul Wetherbee, Anna Kopitov, Cary Feldmann, (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Don Gay (USFS); and Jamie Riche (PDSA Consulting).  NEXT MEETING DATES TRIG: October 4, 2007, 9 am <ad> 2 pm, Location TBD (Mill Creek??) Future TRIG Meetings: Oct. 4, Nov. 1, Dec. 6  ACTION ITEMS All - Note September TRIG cancellation ... Next TRIG meeting is October 4 Brock - Check Mill Creeks availability for TRIG meetings, confirm w/ Tony  Kathy All Marty -  Email site visit info to full TRIG Let Kathy know if youd like to participate in the botanical teamlets site visit By August 24, review the Cooke Elk Forage study and Dons Forage Equivalency Units (from SA) to ensure consistency within the elk forage table <ad> connect w/ Ira  Marty - By August 24, research best practices re: forage management (AUMs, mowing, grazing, etc) for easement language ... coordinate w/ Kathy, Don, & Ira Don - By August 24, connect w/ Hurns field folks (Anna to back up), coordinate field  visit with Marty to support forage management easement language (see above) Marty - Acquire DNR photos of ,,initial property  Marty - Email TRMP to all TRIG at least one week prior to Oct. 4 meeting date  Ira - Follow-up with Don re: on-site meeting with property owners  Kathy - Work with Lauren / Laurel re: goals / objective language for botanical chapters  Baker River Project Relicense TRIG DRAFT Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 5   PREVIOUS <ad> STILL RELEVANT <ad> ACTION ITEMS  Tony - email loon photos to full TRIG  Tony - report website status (for posting notes) at 7/5 meeting Tony <ad> Work with Jacob to ensure the draft 505 plan is consistent with Section 8  language agreement Tony / Anna <ad> Resolve the Carex flava base mapping issue with Joetta Ray & Tony <ad> Touch base with the new possible alternative property representation and  All <ad>  schedule pre-acquisition review (on hold pending current acquisition activities) In reviewing the TRMP land acquisition sections; consider how to list primary  and secondary decision criteria. Tony <ad> Forward information about all potential land acquisition parcels to elk teamlet  with a reminder about the need for confidentiality of all such information  Marty TRMP Reminders: When reformatting the TRMP for FERC, also collect the "rationale" sections from the older  versions into one rationale document for future administrators.  Find and incorporate eagle night roost survey protocols (Ch. 12)  Ensure all land acquisition articles are consistent with Section 8 weed management language  Enlarge the PSE engineering specifications in Appendix 7.1  BRICC UPDATE The August 22nd meeting has been changed to a conference call.  LICENCE UPDATE The NMFS BiOp has been completed and is being reviewed; Cary shared that hes not expecting any surprises. The 401 and Concrete shoreline appeals have been consolidated, and the hearing for both has been scheduled for November 7, 8, and 9. This should not affect license issuance.  TEAMLET UPDATES Botanical Teamlet: Joetta made all the GIS data available. The teamlet is scheduling several site visits this month to evaluate existing species, conduct a rare plant survey for the hatchery location, and look for two plants (a lichen and an orchid) that were found in 2002 and have since been listed. Management plans for these newly listed plants will follow. Kathy will coordinate these with other members of the TRIG who have expressed interest in viewing the sites. Anna shared that PSE and USFS met to discuss plant propagation and agreed to develop a protocol / decision-making matrix to guide actions related to re-vegetation.  Osprey / Loon Teamlet Update: There havent been any surveys since our last meeting. There was no visible loon usage of the new loon platform; the platform and signage will be removed this month. The first Osprey productivity survey will be conducted in Year 1 of the license issuance.  Eagle Delisting: Sally reported by email that the eagle delisting should not impact the TRIGs plans/activities.  Baker River Project Relicense TRIG DRAFT Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 2 of 5   THE DON SHOW (ARTICLES 515-517) Article 515 <ad> Early Seral Forest Growth Don noted that USFS thinning at the lower elevations will occur throughout the entire unit, but at higher elevations 25-90% of the unit would occur depending on planting failures. These trees are all pre-commercial, small-diameter trees between 15 and 30 years old. The actual schedule for thinning activities is dependent on license issuance and is probably at least a year away. Brock recommended that thinning be scheduled to avoid migrating birds (after August 15). Article 516 <ad> Mountain Goats Don shared that the USFS is planning to emulate the crown burn that happens in nature to increase the ground level forage production for mountain goats. He used a GIS query to identify the best locations for this activity (steep ground, trees close enough to transfer the fire upward, etc) and has brought in an expert from the Parks Dept. to develop prescriptions/guidelines (weather conditions, etc) and manage the burn itself. USFS will consult with USFWS about "burning up murrelets" (Don's language) prior to implementation. Article 517 <ad> Grizzly Bear Road Management Don shared highlights of the USFS road management plan. Using maps of the area, he pointed out the roads USFS is planning to decommission and/or close, using RMEF, USFS and other grant dollars as well as about $100k in license implementation dollars. The criteria for selecting roads included each roads use for accessing important recreation sites, slide hazard issues, and habitat needs. Most roads will be decommissioned, which includes the removal of culverts and installation of erosion prevention measures during re-vegetation. Revegetation typically happens naturally within a year or so. One road near potential future vegetation management will be closed but not decommissioned. Articles 515-517 Records Maintenance We discussed the best methods for maintaining records of these activities. We agreed that an annual TRIG update (annual Don show) is sufficient. Don will provide written summary if needed for FERC reporting. EASEMENT UPDATE: Ira reviewed the progress to date on the easement language for the "initial property." After additional research, Ira suggests that some of the complexity around the easement language and the Habitat Manage Plan (HMP) can be addressed by leaving language in the easement which gives the owner the right to raise "reasonable objection" to the HMP so long as the baseline number of Elk Forage Equivalency Units is reached. This would both simplify some of the language issues we discussed at the July meeting and would help ensure the easement is focused on the goal of sufficient elk forage. We also briefly reviewed team members comments about the table of Easement language and Ira noted their suggestions / edits. Right of First Refusal: Ira shared that the owner is open to this provision, shares our underlying interests, and has suggested additional restrictions to help maintain the open space quality of the land. Ira is researching this idea and will continue discussions with the owner.  Baker River Project Relicense TRIG DRAFT Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 3 of 5   Livestock, Haying, Forage Management: Ira talked at length with the owner about livestock, grazing, mowing/haying and the impact to elk forage. The owner has been open to this negotiation. Marty and Don are going to research best practice around this and connect with Ira about the wording for this issue. Water, Mineral Rights: The title report showed no listed, recorded documents related to these rights. Other existing regulations and proposed easement requirements to maintain a minimum number of forage units should be sufficient to ensure these issues dont infringe on elk needs. What's next? The owners appraisal is coming soon. They shared that they are looking into different ways to classify the property, so they may not be facing a ,,lump sum tax burden. This eases the pressure on the timeline for negotiating the easement language. They shared that their intent is to put the money they receive through the easement into a trust to fund the propertys ongoing care and maintenance costs. The appraisal should be in by the end of August, and Ira is planning to schedule an on-site meeting with the owner to talk more about both parties interests. Don expressed interest in attending this meeting if its appropriate (technical in nature rather than actual negotiations); Ira will follow up with him when scheduling the meeting. TRMP Review We briefly discussed TRMP progress and process. We revisited the discussion of one large TRMP vs. multiple separate documents and noted that although some or all of the TRMPs current chapters may need to be separate documents, Marty will keep it together as one document for now. This is in accordance with our agreement from our May meeting, where we agreed to wait for license issuance (and therefore FERCs guidance) to actually reorganize the document. We also discussed the level of detail to keep in our botanical chapters. We asked Kathy to go ahead and pull detailed and/or annually updated information out of the main body of each chapter, and reference that information in appendices as appropriate. She noted that she hasnt been able to find any written objective / goal language for the botanical chapters; she will connect with Lauren and Laurel for more information since they were the driving force behind these sections. Next Meeting: We discussed timing and noted theres no particular timing need driving us to review the TRMP on September, and noted that the easement language is at a point that next steps will be done by Ira and smaller subsets of TRIG folks. We therefore agreed to cancel the September 5 meeting. The next TRIG meeting will be October 4. The Forest Service Mountlake Terrace location will officially be unavailable by then, so Brock will see if the WDFW Mill Creek office is available for our meetings and will coordinate with Tony. HANDOUTS Agenda TRIG July 5, 2007 Meeting Notes Easement language table  Baker River Project Relicense TRIG DRAFT Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 4 of 5   PARKING LOT Develop protocol for pre-acquisition field visit AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING October 4, 2007, 9 am <ad> 2 pm, Mill Creek (?? <ad> Brock to confirm) 1. Welcome, review notes, action items, agenda 2. BRICC / License Update 3. Loon / Osprey and Botanical Teamlet Updates 4. Easement Update 5. TRMP Review <ad> "The Marty Show" and discussion about the following: a. What stays in the TRMP chapters (details vs. protocols) b. One big document vs. separate documents 6. Other? 7. Evaluate meeting, set next meeting agenda  Baker River Project Relicense TRIG DRAFT Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 5 of 5    2007trig20070802.pdf en 