BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting Meeting Agenda February 21, 2007 11:00 a.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. Baker Lodge, Concrete, WA Agenda 1. Welcome and Introductions 2. Review Action Items 3. HRA presentation BR Hydroelectric Development HD Contributing resources and character defining features 4. Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee 5. Status report on early implementation of Settlement Agreement projects FSC LB gate cars LB Power House Spawning beaches Hatchery 6. Develop timeline for completing HPMP 7. Monitoring report status 8. Site stabilization project status 9. Discuss Site surface collecting 10. Discuss future meeting locations 11. Evaluate Meeting 12. Define Next Steps   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting February 21, 2007 11:00 a.m. <ad> 3:30 p.m. Baker Lodge, Concrete, WA Draft Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE): email elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com and phone number (425) 462-3609. PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Jan Hollenbeck (U.S. Forest Service), Ron Kent (Army Corps) Chris Miss (NWAA), Heather Miller (HRA), Kelly Bush (ERCI), Tamela Smart (ERCI) PRESENT BY CONFERENCE CALL: Robert Whitlam (SHPO) February 21 Agenda: 1. Welcome and Introductions 2. Review Action Items 3. HRA presentation BR Hydroelectric Development HD Contributing resources and character defining features 4. Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee (Elizabeth) 5. Status report on early implementation of Settlement Agreement projects FSC LB gate cars LB Power House Spawning beaches Hatchery 6. Develop timeline for completing HPMP 7. Monitoring report status and ARPA permit status 8. Site stabilization project status 9. Ron Kent with Action Items from 2006 10. Discuss Site surface collecting and monitoring in general 11. Discuss future meeting locations 12. Evaluate Meeting 13. Define Next Steps   Next Meeting March 21, 2007 at Baker Lodge Welcome and Introductions Welcome to all. Kelly is facilitating with Tamela from ERCI as note taker. Rob joined us on the phone Review Action Items Stabilization Project:  draw down will occur in April and possibly as late as May PSE is going to pay for materials and contractors directly. Discussion of how the Forest Service is going to get the money. Roger Nicholls (Forest Service) needs to be out there Scott Schuyler has requested a schedule and a tribal monitor Kelly will coordinate Schedule with NWAA and Roger Nicholls (FS) Project should be done in March Rob Whitlam requests pictures of before during and after project. Kelly suggests filter fabric a single one by three foot piece that will be placed at the overhang straight down. Questions still exist as to if it would become exposed and possibly cause more damage. Possible use of the filter fabric will be run by the three people and Kelly will coordinate HRA Presentation: Discussion concerning contributing factors in determining the district. The question is raised as to how the district is impacted by the loss of contributing factors. Are these losses being considered in the planning? Heather suggests trying to put into place a list of the changes that have been and what their effects have been. Documentation, oral interviews with involved parties, HAER. The HAER would be a snapshot of the existing facilities the beginning of providing documentation. Not the end of mitigation. We can't accept adverse affects and manage with HAER, we need more discussion. Documentation is only a form of preservation that should be used when all other forms of preservation have been considered first. Discussion of what the district is and what and how it should be changed. Elizabeth brought up a discussion of interpretive/public outreach and the example used was new vs. old fish screens. These are the same way of doing fisheries related activities but with new technology. Adult fish trap is an example where the new elements are in place with the existing infrastructure. Is that all we can salvage? What about preservation in place, what about side by side? Change is one of the character defining features of this district. Discussion followed of how difficult it is to put the two ideas of maintaining an historic district and "change" in the same thought. Jan states that changes are still an adverse effect on the character defining features of the district and wants to work harder on preserving elements in place rather than just preserving a picture of what it was. What is the threshold of the district going away? Discussion of 60/40 rule on maintaining integrity of a Historic district. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting February 21, 2007 Page 2 of 12   We need to preserve some in place if we want to be able to effectively show change. It seems to have gotten too easy to document and remove. We should be leaders in thinking creatively on how we manage this district that is our charge. The CRAG must be involved earlier in the planning process not after it is a done deal. Our group needs an annual work plan and Elizabeth needs the CRAG to identify their concerns and issues relative to threats and importance of elements in the district. If she understands some of the specific concerns of the CRAG group, this enable her to introduce cultural resource issues into the conversation during the early planning process that reflect the group and not just her own experiences. She needs ideas for other creative management options and education opportunities. Rob suggested interactive web site. We need as a group to reaffirm our commitment to preserving in place and need specialists to assist in these discussions with regard to built historic features and properties as our group expertise is heavy on archaeological expertise. Lunch 12:30 <ad> 1 PM Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee: (Elizabeth) Gave hand out and we ran through the implementation portion that covered the topics below. Status Report on early implementation Floating Surface Collector: FSC Elizabeth reported that during the preconstruction meeting it became clear that on the ground the development is not going to impact the archaeological site. We will continue with the MOA and monitoring as it exists to make sure that the development proceeds as planned. We will need monitors if they removed the log barriers as they are in the site. The construction crew is experienced working with cultural resource specialists and that is reassuring. Elizabeth is committed to improving communication with the engineering team to increase the time that she gets the changes in design and other data. Elizabeth also extended an invitation to group members to see the gulper in action and will arrange to bring a 5 minute show on its virtual operation to the next meeting. Lower Baker Gate Cars No change <ad> they haven't moved yet. March 12 starting date. Lower Baker Powerhouse Start thinking about location and design. Do we need additional survey? Spawning Beaches Decommissioning next summer is the timeline. The issues are asbestos pipe, safety as recreational area, old agreement or conditions of the conditional use permit with the FS. What are they actually planning? It sounds like pull everything out and regrade. There may be "thinning" of trees associated with this action. This might require CMT survey. We need a field trip out there with historic specialists to explore preservation options. Kelly will check on access and get back to Elizabeth. Maybe we can preserve one of them and have some outreach options? Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting February 21, 2007 Page 3 of 12   Develop timeline for completing HPMP The license could be issued sometime this year. We will wait until the license is issued to add comments. If the comments from FERC are contentious she will call a meeting within a week of issuance. Otherwise, within 30 days of issuance Elizabeth sends out a request for comments with a 60 day comment period. Elizabeth sends the comments around to everyone and the changes are made to the draft <ad> Chris will have a draft for distribution within 30 days of the end of the first 60 day comment period. This final will be distributed with a 60 day comment period and we will have our final HPMP. Monitoring report status and ARPA permit status Chris is willing to take comments on Survey report from last September. Discussion of western site boundary for WH753. Monitoring report is almost completed for submission/distribution. Chris needs annual work plan to submit ARPA submission by end of February. This should include: additional testing/survey, collection, monitoring, geomorph, treatment plan. Ron Kent with Action Items from 2006 Kelly was going to create a site stabilization plan for 736. We got going on 753 but she will take FS Geologist Roger Nicholls out to the site while they are doing the work at 753 and get his opinion on best practice for stabilizing, ideally this will happen when Chris and Elizabeth are on the site. Discussion on LIDAR <ad> Elizabeth will look into what we have and what we can use. Discuss Site surface collecting and monitoring in general Tribes view of collection? Ability to keep sites safe as recreation increases and reservoir action continues Sample size is not really the issue as we have such a small sample. You can't collect everything as the reservoir is constantly changing. In those places where we can't protect in place we should collect. We can document thoroughly and put artifacts in a safe place. Experimentation in safe site locations would be interesting and meaningful. Treatment plan is started the questions of how to monitor disappearing and reappearing site areas is complex and needs our continued work. Elizabeth is interested in looking at what other reservoirs are doing. Discuss future meeting locations Can't use the lodge in the summer what are our other options: FS office in Woolley wasn't ideal problems with the phone Annie's was too loud but great pizza Casinos Tribal Settings PSE office in Mt. Vernon, need to make food arrangements FS office in Mountlake Terrace Eagles in Concrete Cajun Grill in Concrete Evaluate Meeting Good: food, location and discussions, meetings better on a regular basis, having HRA for historic discussion and Rob on the phone all great. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting February 21, 2007 Page 4 of 12   Improvements: More Tribal involvement! Let's consider setting aside time on the agenda for them, meeting at tribal settings, casual meeting settings or socials, find their interest areas and create that space for them. Action Items: Budget for stabilization project to Elizabeth (Kelly, Chris and Jan) Get 3 pieces of feedback on adding filter fabric to stabilization (Kelly) Kelly will check on access road to spawning beaches and get back to Elizabeth. Kelly will get phone number for the Cajun Grill to Elizabeth. Kelly will work with tribes to bring them up to date on the HPMP and its schedule Kelly will arrange to do a site visit with Roger Nicholls to 736 while they are working on 753. Elizabeth will submit annual work plan for ARPA permit to Chris next week. Elizabeth will look into LIDAR for our management uses. Elizabeth with acquire a 5 minute DVD of gulper in action Elizabeth will consider Tribal involvement question. Elizabeth will look into what other reservoirs are doing about treatment for sites. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting February 21, 2007 Page 5 of 12    2007crag20070221.pdf en 