BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting Meeting Agenda April 18, 2007 10:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. The Cajun Bar and Grill, Concrete, WA  Agenda 1. 2. 3. 4.  Welcome and Introductions Review Action Items Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee Status report on early implementation of Settlement Agreement projects FSC LB gate cars LB Power House Spawning beaches Hatchery 5. Washington Portland Cement Company HD 6. “Gulper” Field Visit 7. Monitoring report status 8. Elk Land Purchase Proposal 9. Results of Monitoring at FSC 10. Update on Site Stabilization Project 11. Evaluate Meeting 12. Define Next Steps   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 18, 2007 10:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Cajun Bar and Grill, Concrete, WA  Draft Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE): email is elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com and phone number is (425) 462-3609. PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Connie Freeland (PSE), Jan Hollenbeck (U.S. Forest Service), Ron Kent (Army Corps) Scott Schulyer (USIT), Heather Miller (HRA), Leigh Cutler (HRA), Kelly Bush (ERCI), and Tamela Smart (ERCI) PRESENT BY CONFERENCE CALL: No phone capability  April 18 Agenda: 1. 2. 3. 4.  Welcome and Introductions Review Action Items Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee Status report on early implementation of Settlement Agreement projects FSC LB gate cars LB Power House Spawning beaches Hatchery 5. Washington Portland Cement Company HD 6. “Gulper” Field Visit 7. Monitoring report status 8. Elk Land Purchase Proposal 9. Results of Monitoring at FSC 10. Update on Site Stabilization Project 11. Meeting Scheduling 12. Concrete Museum Newspaper Project 13. Evaluate Meeting   Welcome and Introductions Review Action Items: Hatchery         The question was raised concerning whether or not the survey was adequate. Elizabeth is concerned about the area outside the fenced area. She provided a handout. Much of the area is disturbed and they do plan on staying primarily within the footprint Additional survey will be needed. The survey should be done this summer and needs to be added to NWAA’s work plan. There are no known historic resources within the area The APE is approximately 7.6 acres New infrastructure will be put in. Elizabeth needs to find out where the new infrastructure (water lines etc.) is going to be located. Is it going to be in the previous footprint?  Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee  April 25, 2007 is the date of the next meeting  Concrete voted to re-license.  The shoreline permit is close to being issued.  It is being discussed by the attorneys and their next meeting May 7, 2007.  It is expected that SEPA, Shorelines, water etc. will go through by mid May  Still waiting for Biological opinions  Expecting early summer for FERC license  The question is raised as to how they are going to proceed without the HPMP. The choices are to either go under the spirit of the HPMP or under 800. Rob needs to be included in the discussion. Needs to be added to the agenda for the next meeting. Status Report on early Implementation of Settlement Agreement Projects Floating Surface Collector:  Belly tanks are there. It is currently being constructed.  The anchor area was monitored and 6 piles were put in. No cultural material was found.  The report from NWAA should be out next week. LB Gate Cars  The DC car has been removed  AC car is still there LB Power House  Elizabeth is going to talk with Chris about additional survey or cultural concerns Spawning Beaches  Discussion of piggy backing it with the May meeting or possibly June 20.  The location can be accessed however they will have to walk for part of it. Hatchery  Discussed under review of action items Washington Portland Cement Company HD  Restoration of the club house was discussed. It could possibly be used as a visitor center. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 18, 2007 Page 2 of 5             Issues that were brought up include: o the drainage problem, o How could it be modified to open up the interior more? o What needs to be off limits to the public and what is open to them. o HAZMAT needs to be completed o Safety concerns…..silos. o The old railroad bed could be used for a trail that provides a view of the historic district Heather and Leigh provided a presentation on what a historic structure report would entail. o Taken from NPS guidelines o The guidelines provide a baseline, recommendations, a developmental history, a condition assessment, brings all the information together, and treatment plan. o Heather provided an example of what the format would be. o The report itself will be on the club house and bring aspects of the historic district Elizabeth thinks they can get more funding if it is associated with a visitor center. Jan is interested in discussing how it fits into the HPMP and if it is a funding trade off. The question is raised as to where the funding will come from and how it fits in with FERC etc. Connie brought up that they will not know until the license is issued and there is a settlement agreement. It is not in the settlement agreement or license. The project will not take away from any other projects it would come out o f the budgets of bigger projects. A scope of work needs to be presented to the CRAG  Gulper Field Visit  May 9, 2007  Those attending include Heather, Elizabeth, and possibly Jan, Ron and Scott  Jan asks that those that attend report back to the group and take pictures Monitoring Report Status  An update will be provided by Chris  Elizabeth is expecting the report soon. Elk Land Purchase Proposal  Discussed need for CRAG to review potential land purchases relative to Cultural Resource Management obligations. Results of Monitoring at FSC  Information needs to be obtained from NWAA Update on Site Stabilization Project  Scott is ok with the project and has gone out to the project site  Project delayed due to access issues  NWAA did perform a survey and collection  A bridge was put in at the location where the road was washed away.  There is access to the stabilization area Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 18, 2007 Page 3 of 5                  Project will start Tuesday, April 24, 2007 at 8:00 am. Elizabeth will be on site. NWAA will also need to be there. Discussion on the bucket that will be used by the machine. Scott does have questions regarding the re-vegetation. The re-vegetation has to meet Forest Service standards. There had been a previous discussion on re-vegetation however it had been decided against. Using lichens is a possibility. Another possibility is using woody debris however it is believed that it could cause further damage. Ron brought up the possibility of using sedges. Further discussion is needed. Kelly and Elizabeth are going to make sure that someone from NWAA will be on-site. Funding discussion- There is a question regarding the funding signature, original/amendment. Discussion of a monitoring schedule. See page 96 of the HPMP. The monitoring schedule needs to be added to the annual work plan. Discussion of access to the site during the project. Will the gates be open? If so this is a concern as it would provide access to the public. Could a sign be obtained? This needs to be resolved prior to the project. Discussion of billing for quarry spalls.  Meeting Scheduling  May 16 will be kept as the next meeting date. Elizabeth is thinking of having the meeting at the Mount Vernon Puget Sound office  Kelly will have to facilitate again on June 20.  Elizabeth is going to check on the availability of the Baker Lodge for June 20. This would possibly be a good day for the spawning visit.  Other meeting dates: July 25, Aug 21, Sept 19, and Oct 16 Concrete Museum Newspaper Project  discussion  Next Meeting May 16, 2007 Evaluate Meeting Good location Food was good It was a nice day It was good that Scott came  Improvements: Phone capability Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 18, 2007 Page 4 of 5   Missed the Sauk-Suiattle and the Swinomish Missed Bob M. Attendence: Discussion of parties that do not attend and how they could possibly provide meaningful review  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 18, 2007 Page 5 of 5    2007crag20070418.pdf en 