 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting Meeting Agenda November 7, 2007 11:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Baker Lodge, Concrete, WA Lunch 12:30 Agenda 1. Welcome and Introductions-Elizabeth 2. Review Action Items-All 3. Historic Properties Management Plan (HPMP) Overview-All 4. HPMP Review & Edits Start on Section 6 5. Adult Trap 6. Evaluate Meeting-All 7. Define Next Steps-All BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting November 7, 2007 11:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Baker Lodge, Concrete, WA Final Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE): email is elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com and phone number is (425) 462-3609. PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Jan Hollenbeck (U.S. Forest Service), Ron Kent (Army Corps), Kelly Bush (ERCI), Chris Miss (NWAA), and Jessie Piper (NWAA). November 7 Agenda: 1. Welcome and Introductions-Elizabeth 2. Review Action Items-All 3. Historic Properties Management Plan (HPMP) Overview-All 4. HPMP Review & Edits Start on Section 6 5. Adult Trap 6. Evaluate Meeting-All 7. Define Next Steps-All ACTION ITEMS  Jan, Elizabeth, Ron, and the consultants will hold a technical meeting to discuss issues and potential solutions for a treatment plan on November 27, at 10:30 at NWAA. The tribes will also be invited to attend.  Everyone is asked to bring their copies of the HPMP and the Archaeological Monitoring Conditions Report to the December 5 meeting.  Elizabeth will bring copies of Historic Conditions Reports from PGE to the December 5 meeting so that members can review them.  Elizabeth will draft a description of documentation for CRAG to review, for insertion into the Baker Master Plan, so that it is part of PSE’s process to consider with every project.  Elizabeth will collect data for a new table for those buildings that have not been evaluated, and include a DOE schedule.  Elizabeth will see if the Museum newspaper project can be added to the Master Plan.  Jan will get the project initiation form to Elizabeth.  Elizabeth will review NAGPRA rules to see if a Plan of Action needs to be pursued with the USFS to avoid mandatory work stoppages. Welcome and Introductions—Elizabeth  Jessie Piper provided historical background for the development of the Historic Properties Management Plan and attended this meeting as a resource. Review Action Items:  Heather will check the HAER work on the Lower Baker gate cars and the Gulper, find out who it was sent to, and get it to Jan and others who need it. Elizabeth has the documents and will get copies to Ron and Jan. She will bring a copy to the next meeting for others to review. She will also check with those not in attendance today to see if anyone would like copies.  Elizabeth will check that everyone was sent the draft results of the archeological resource monitoring. All CRAG members were sent the draft results.  Elizabeth will get design information on the Adult Trap for CRAG when it is available, and in time for input. This item will be addressed on the regular agenda.  Elizabeth will add Greg and Russell from SHPO to the list for CRAG meeting notices for discussions on historical aspects of projects. Elizabeth added Greg and Russell to CRAG distribution list.  Elizabeth will talk to Roger at the USFS about a design plan for stabilization. Roger will draw up a proposal for stabilization of the site we discussed at the last meeting. CRAG members may help with narrative and design. This should be ready in December. Elizabeth will handle the logistics as well as funding. The project would ideally be done during drawdown, but details need to be figured out. Historic Properties Management Plan (HPMP) Overview  Jessie Piper provided written historic background on the development of the HPMP which Elizabeth reviewed.  The final Programmatic Agreement (PA) stipulated completion of the HPMP within one year, not six months.  FERC’s intention when the license is issued is that the HPMP as it stands at that time will be implemented as a good faith effort, even if it has not been finalized. Further discussions about process will still take place as issues arise. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting November 7, 2007 Page 2 of 5  The PA includes but is not limited to things that need to be included in the HPMP. Finalization in 2-3 months may be possible, though there are errors in the data, such as incomplete maps, issues about dual eligibility, and outdated tables. Eligibility is determined by a district, not by the individual resource. References in the HPMP need to be spelled out clearly.  The HPMP must reach finalization about the process to be used to deal with cultural resources, with the understanding that some data will change. Table 6.1  5.1.1 – Data recovery and site stabilization are due within six months of the license issuance and are critical. Jan, Elizabeth, Ron, and the consultants will hold a technical meeting to discuss issues and potential solutions for a treatment plan on November 27, at 10:30 at NWAA. The tribes will also be invited to attend. Biologists could help patrol the area, and monitoring as needed. There is already evidence that some sites are disturbed. ACTION: Everyone is asked to bring their copies of the HPMP and the Archaeological Monitoring Conditions Report to the December 5 meeting.  5.1.2 – Maintenance Guidelines. These could be appended or a Historic Conditions Report, much more specific and user-friendly, could be developed and used instead. This refers to above-ground resources. ACTION: Elizabeth will bring copies of Historic Conditions Reports from PGE to the December 5 meeting so that members can review them. It was noted that Paul Wetherbee was unable to attend this meeting as previously announced. Hopefully he will be able to attend the December 5 CRAG meeting.  5.1.4 – Historic District Documentation – This has been done piecemeal so far. Documentation is groundwork for making plans to deal with adverse effects of projects on resources. Plans for the future could be added to the original documentation. FERC wants to know what the documentation will be. ACTION: Elizabeth will draft a description of documentation for CRAG to review, for insertion into the Baker Master Plan, so that it is part of PSE’s process to consider with every project.  5.1.2 – This section was originally about treatment and structures with the idea of a 30- year license. “Update DOE” needs to be added back in as 5.1.2A. It is to be based on a schedule which was not yet developed for individual buildings. The schedule is on a ten- year basis based on the age of the buildings. The conditions assessment updates will be done every five years. Buildings less than 50 years old are neither evaluated nor eligible. There was a question about whether there should be two sections – those buildings that were ineligible and those that were not evaluated due to the age of the building. ACTION: Elizabeth will collect data for a new table for those buildings that have not been evaluated, and include a DOE schedule.  5.2 Additional Studies – The Concrete Heritage Museum would like to scan the newspapers, in addition to the study listed. This project was seen as more of a community outreach, and not part of the HPMP. ACTION: Elizabeth will see if this project can be added to the Master Plan. The team will need to develop Community Relations for Year 3. The focus for this is connecting with the local community. This section was primarily focused on the Museum. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting November 7, 2007 Page 3 of 5 The museum was to receive money both for the study and for a deliverable. The Enhancement Fund was to cover additional studies, but it is no longer part of the license (although PSE has not been issued the actual License yet). The Cultural Resource Enhancement Fund is in the Settlement Agreement, and PSE has said they will fund it. It is in Elizabeth’s long-range budget and may cover some additional studies. The idea was that the money could be banked until there is a worthwhile study.  5.3.1 – Project Initiation – This refers to the Cultural Resource Coordinator’s work, the management process itself: collecting and evaluating data, and presenting it to CRAG as an Annual Plan. Tracking of smaller projects is a challenge, but email notices including basic information could help keep members informed on small projects that were not included in the Annual Plan. ACTION: Jan will get the project initiation form to Elizabeth.  5.3.2-5.4.3 – UDP/Treatment of Human Remains – This section was not dependent on the license but should already be in effect. The contact information needs to be updated annually. ACTION: Elizabeth will review NAGPRA rules to see if a Plan of Action needs to be pursued with the USFS.  5.3.4 – Tribal Coordination – Elizabeth will need to meet with the Tribes within six months of license issuance. The schedule needs to be changed to “Annual or as needed.”  5.3.5 – Resource Monitoring – This is about implementing a resource monitoring plan in Year 2 and is separate from historic.  5.3.6 – Curation – We need a curation facility to store archaeological field notes, reports, and the collection, about 3-5 boxes total. The Parks Service cannot help. The Burke Museum may be the only option, or a Tribe could become a licensed curation facility. The collection would be held in trust and could be moved in the future if a local curation facility is developed. Costs are minimal: $300 for accession, $60 per box annually, less for records. There may be future collections, and it would be preferable to store everything in one location. Perhaps Parks would reconsider if they realized it is a small collection and the need is temporary storage. ACTION: Elizabeth will follow up with Parks again on possible Curation.  5.3.7 – Staff Training and Law Enforcement – Both sections are self-explanatory. It is hoped that local law enforcement will help with patrols.  During the overview discussion of the HPMP, the following items were identified as needing to be addressed during the revision:  Possibly move Section 3.3.3 “Status” on page 65 to page 87.  Check continuity regarding consultation, e.g.”PSE will consult with agencies.” on page 87 (DOE)  Check duplicate paragraphs on pages 96 and 83.  Responding to a question from Kelly about representation on the BRCC, Elizabeth outlined her role in reviewing all the notes and attending occasional meetings, which is the same role as the other group coordinators. Connie Freeland has been attending the BRCC in her Compliance role and has been bringing BRCC reports to the CRAG. With her retirement, Elizabeth will now report on BRCC. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting November 7, 2007 Page 4 of 5 Adult Trap--Elizabeth  Elizabeth reported that she had discussed with the Adult Trap Design Team the question about CRAG’s participation in the Trap design development and was reminded that all the Agencies are deeply involved at a specialist level. CRAG members have access to all the design materials through the specialists in their own agencies. Elizabeth will continue to attend meetings and bring back overview information that pertains to the CRAG. Any concerns from CRAG will be reviewed by Fisheries, but the project is not specifically in our area. CRAG members who want more information may access that through their own Agencies. Evaluate Meeting Good food Thank you, Jessie – good insights Great facilitation Great location Great food Define Next Steps  Chris will update the HPMP based on today’s notes and send it out by early January. CRAG members will have 60 days to review and get their comments to Chris. Chris will have 30 days to revise and send it back to CRAG, and CRAG members will have an additional 60 days to review the revised copy.  Agenda Items for December 5 meeting:  Report on Treatment Plan proposals  Other reports  Curation follow-up  Surface collection discussion Next Meeting Wednesday, December 5, 2007 Baker Lodge Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting November 7, 2007 Page 5 of 5  