 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting Meeting Agenda January 24th 07 11:30 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Baker Lodge, Concrete, WA Agenda 1. Welcome and Introductions 2. Review Action Items 3. Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee 4. Status report on major licensed projects FSC LB gate cars Hatchery LB Power House Spawning beaches 5. Review HPMP measures due: at license six months after license w/in one year 6. Discuss MOAs 7. Evaluate Meeting 8. Define Next Steps BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 24, 2007 11:30 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Baker Lodge, Concrete, WA Draft Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE): email is elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com and phone number is (425) 462-3609. PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil and Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Kelly Bush (Equinox Research & Consulting), Jan Hollenbeck (U.S. Forest Service), Bob Mierendorf (National Park Service), Chris Miss (Northwest Archaeological Associates. January 24 Agenda: 1. Welcome and Introductions 2. Review Action Items 3. Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee 4. Status report on major projects FSC LB gate cars Hatchery LB Powerhouse Spawning beaches Shoreline Stabilization for #738 (Horeseshoe Cove) Monitoring Report 5. Review HPMP measures due: At license Six months after license w/in one year 6. Discuss MOAs 7. Evaluate Meeting 8. Define Next Steps Action Items: All – Set aside at least one hour in next meeting agenda for HRA to do a brief overview of contributing elements Elizabeth – Check on Lyn’s availability to facilitate future meetings Elizabeth – Let team members discuss hatchery issues prior to consultation with SHPO All – Set aside time to discuss collection on the surface Next Meeting February 21, 2007 Welcome and Introductions The group welcomed Elizabeth as the new team leader for the CRAG. Kelly facilitated and Connie took notes. Changes to the agenda included eliminating the word “licensed” in from of projects because the new FERC license hasn’t been issued yet. It is more accurate to describe the projects as “early implementation of the Settlement Agreement.” Review Action Items Since the last meeting of the group was February 21, 2006, no one could remember any action items or just assumed they must have been accomplished. Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee Connie gave a status of the relicensing process since our last meeting. The Draft EIS, issued by FERC on April 8, 2006, did not adopt the full Settlement Agreement (“SA”). Sixteen parties sent comments to FERC requesting they adopt all articles in the SA and giving reasons. The Final EIS, issued on Sept. 8, 2006, reinstated all but 5 articles. Articles left out were 304 (Recreation and Water Safety; will be added to regular public safety plan PSE is required to produce), 318 (Law Enforcement; will most likely be addressed in a side agreement with the parties involved), 505 (Aquatic Riparian Habitat; DOE plans to include this in the Water Quality Certificate (“WQC”), which is a mandatory condition on the license), 602 (Required Funding; probably addressed through a side agreement) and 603 (Adaptive Management; basically a philosophy guiding license implementation). She reiterated that PSE has always committed to meeting all requirements in the SA, even those not included in the new license. She noted that the following actions are still outstanding: biological opinions (Jan. or Feb.); Shoreline permit from Concrete (Feb.); SEPA document issued by DOE on Jan. 12 for review (adopted FEIS with addenda for eagles and non-native plants); draft of WQC issued in December, with comments due Jan. 26; and CZMA expected mid to late Feb. If there are no appeals in any of the processes, we anticipate a new license by March or April 2007. The last BRICC meeting was Nov. 16, 2006; the next meeting is Feb. 28, 2007. Status Report on Major Projects Floating Surface Collector: FSC Elizabeth reported that the kick-off meeting for construction of the FSC will be held Jan. 31. At this meeting she will discuss sensitive areas and give training, without revealing any confidential information. Also monitors from NWAA will be at the meeting. The schedule is 80 days for mobilization, including building roads to use to bring in the equipment needed to build the FSC. The color scheme for the FSC Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 24, 2007 Page 2 of 12 will be a combination of gray and spruce. Elizabeth coordinated all of the comments on color that she received from the team members. There will be no guide net towers; instead, a buoy system with pads will be used. A monthly monitoring report will be prepared by NWAA and Upper Skagit may have a tribal monitor. Lower Baker Gate Cars Elizabeth reported that the DC gate car at Lower Baker is scheduled to be removed and the new one has been fabricated. All HABS/HAER documentation was completed and approved before removal. Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE Sr CR Scientist), Russ Holter from DAHP, and Al Lynch (PSE Power Generation Service man VI ) visited the site. Russ suggested that the entire bed of the gate cars and the wheels be removed intact and stored in a locked area near the dam. Al, who will oversee the removal of the car, thought this was the easiest way to remove the gate car with the crane. The Snoqualmie Railway Museum may want the car. The rails will also be saved if possible, although they will not be removed until a later date when they are no longer being used. The AC car will be left in place as a back up for a least one season. Historic District Jan expressed concerns that changes to the fish facilities will affect the contributing resources of the Fish District. Chris noted that lots of historic districts are being diminished or even delisted. Elizabeth reminded that the fish facilities are evolving, which makes them significant, and that changes are necessary at hydro plants. Kelly suggested setting aside one hour at our next meeting for HRA to present an overview of the contributing elements of the historic district. Hatchery Elizabeth noted that the area for the new hatchery has been completely disturbed previously. There will be a meeting Feb. 1 to discuss the hatchery. Lower Baker Powerhouse Elizabeth noted that the plans for the powerhouse are not definite yet. The current powerhouse is very close to a recent slide area. Spawning Beaches Elizabeth reported that it is uncertain if spawning beaches 1, 2, and 3 will just be decommissioned and left in place or actually removed. Jan noted that the road to the beaches, which are on Forest Service property, has been washed out and will not be restored. Jan also stated that she has been informed by FS personnel that spawning beaches 1, 2, and 3 will be removed. Monitoring Report Chris reported that by using GPS they now have an accurate map of and a good baseline for archaeological sites. Generally they found less artifacts when they went back from what was noted previously. She handed out a table for all sites. The question was raised about collecting all, some or most artifacts that are on the surface. Chris noted that some sites are very threatened and probably should be collects and continually monitored. It was agreed that site collection should be determined on a site by site basis. The question was raised about what the tribes would think of surface collecting. This topic will be discussed further at a future meeting. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 24, 2007 Page 3 of 12 Bank Stabilization at 738 Kelly reported on the Horse Shoe Cove site that was newly discovered last spring in a heavily recreated area in a hosted campground. The site is severely threatened by erosion and the public. Kelly has worked with the USFS to come up with a plan for the site. The plan includes collecting surface artifacts and then building a slope of quarry spalls to break the wave action and hopefully halt the undercutting of the site. The USFS has lots of experience with building this type of protection for threatened sites. The plan and a budget for the work needs to be finalized. Then the tribes and SHPO need to be consulted. Implementation could happen as soon as March, which is before the recreation season begins. The cost will be approximately $20,000 to stabilize the site. Elizabeth and Connie noted that they need the plan and budget in order to request funding for the work from PSE. Review HPMP Measures/Discuss MOAs Discussion of the HPMP was postponed until the next meeting. The MOAs were discussed earlier. Next Meetings The team calendared the following dates for CRAG meeting: February 21, March 21, April 18 and May 16. Meeting Evaluation Good: Good facilitation Good lunch Glad to have Elizabeth on board Got out on time Improvements: Need more attendees Start at 11 instead of 11:30 Try to get Lyn to facilitate Handouts Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 24, 2007 Page 4 of 12  