BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting April 5th, 2007 (9:00 p.m. - 2:00 p.m.) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 5215, Password: 12345 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 (c)) if you plan to call into meeting  AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from March 1st, 2007 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? Any updates on WQC, 401, BiOp? 3. Osprey and Loon update 4. Continue Chapter-by-Chapter TRMP Review (using the clean copy) Updates from Marty, Anna Unresolved issues? TRMP “finalization” plan 5. Elk Lands Discussion (at around noon) Proposal to “initial property” owner 6. Other? 7. Evaluate meeting, set date and agenda for next meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Baker River Project License Implementation  Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes April 5, 2007 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mountlake Terrace  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Anna Kopitov, Cary Feldmann, Ira McDaniel (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Laura Potash Martin (USFS); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS), and Jamie Riche (PDSA Consulting). NEXT MEETING DATES TRIG: May 3, 2007, 9 am – 2 pm, Mtlk Terrace Future TRIG Meetings: June 7, July 5, Aug. 2, Sept. 6, Oct. 4, Nov. 1, Dec. 6 Elk Teamlet: TBD as needed, maybe a field trip? ACTION ITEMS Marty – Ensure all land acquisition articles are consistent with Section 8 weed management language Tony – Update Jacob re: Section 8 language agreement so he can ensure the draft plan is consistent Marty – Enlarge the PSE engineering specifications in Appendix 7.1 Laura – Encourage Joe Arnett, rare plant botanist, to participate in the Botanical Teamlet Anna – Email the Botanical Teamlet and TRIG to find dates to reconvene the Teamlet to review Chapters 8, 9, and 10 Kathy, Tony and Anna – Collect / distribute the Botanical Teamlet’s work to date (by CD?) Tony / Anna – Resolve the Carex flava base mapping issue and send the final report to TRIG Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Meeting Notes, April 5, 2007  Page 1 of 3   Tony / Brock – Work w/ Mike and tribal folks to schedule an elk mtg (week of 4/23?) PREVIOUS – STILL RELEVANT – ACTION ITEMS All – In reviewing the TRMP land acquisition sections; consider how to list primary and secondary decision criteria. Tony – Forward information about all potential land acquisition parcels to elk teamlet with a reminder about the need for confidentiality of all such information BRICC / LICENCE UPDATE Connie (PSE) will send out a written update soon. PSE is working internally to be prepared for a June issuance. If we don’t have a new license from FERC by the April 30th expiration of the previous one-year extension, PSE will file for another one-year extension so they can continue to operate under the provisions of the previous license. BiOps have been written and continue to be in internal review. Lou Ellyn hopes they will be sent to PSE next week. Osprey / Loon Teamlet Update: The loon platform was placed on Lake Shannon March 19 & 20. The Osprey platform was installed Tuesday, April 3. This is the tenth osprey platform on Lk. Shannon. He walked us through photos (virtual field trip!) of the platforms and installation. There was great celebration throughout the room … Update on USFS meeting re: weed control and land acquisition: Laura and Tony shared the process USFS and PSE used to come to agreement on the language about weed management costs on acquired lands for Section 8, Weed Management. Laura and Tony crafted language that made it clear that PSE will not use land acquisition funds to treat noxious weeds. However, PSE may use land acquisition management funds to manage noxious weeds. Tony inserted the new language and Marty will review the land acquisition chapters to ensure consistency. Tony will update Jacob so he can ensure the draft plan for Article 505 is also consistent with the new language and intent. TRMP Review Tony projected our current draft TRMP onto a screen and made live changes as we continued to walk through the document chapter by chapter, starting Chapter 7, Section 7.4. We finished our edits for the day at the end of Chapter 7. Rather than begin to review Chapter 8 (Weed Management), Chapter 9 (Plants of Special Status) and Chapter 10 (Carex flava), the team decided to re-convene the Botanical Teamlet to review / revise those sections. When we come back together as a TRIG on May 3, we will start with Chapter 11, Decaying and Legacy Wood. Tony noted that once the license is issued, we will officially walk through the TRMP again. He shared that FERC may order compliance with each chapter as discreet license articles; if this is the case, we will probably file them all separately. FERC will require the draft plan, signatory comments and the final plan in order to show that PSE complied with consultation requirements. Botanical Teamlet Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Meeting Notes, April 5, 2007  Page 2 of 3   Anna will email the Botanical Teamlet and cc the full TRIG to look for good dates to reconvene, preferably in May. The teamlet will review the botanical work to date and review / revise TRMP chapters 8, 9, and 10. Elk Property Update: We took a break for lunch and welcomed Cary Feldmann and Ira McDaniel (PSE realtor). Tony walked us through a slideshow of photos taken at the “initial property” earlier this year. Ira walked us through our options in regard to purchase of an easement or the land outright. Tony noted the difference between a conservation easement (where property owners donate rights to the land to a non-profit for tax purposes) and a purchased easement (where property owners sell rights to the land). Ira has been researching easement language for protecting our ability to manage the property for elk. Ira outlined his understanding of the owners’ interests and we discussed the various easement and purchase options available to us. Ira will continue to communicate with the owners and arrange for our right of entry. Brock and Tony will work with Mike and tribal representatives to schedule an Elk Teamlet meeting, preferably the week of 4/23. HANDOUTS Agenda TRIG March 1, 2007 Meeting Notes PARKING LOT Develop protocol for pre-acquisition field visit AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING May 3, 2007, 9 am – 2 pm, Mountlake Terrace 1. Welcome, review notes, action items, agenda 2. BRICC / License Update 3. Loon & Osprey Updates 4. Elk Update 5. Continue Chapter-by-Chapter TRMP Review (starting at chapter 11) 6. Other? 7. Evaluate meeting, set next meeting date and agenda  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Meeting Notes, April 5, 2007  Page 3 of 3    2007trig20070405.pdf en 