BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting July 5th, 2007 (9:00 p.m. - 2:00 p.m.) Jamie Riche's house 9002 180th Street S.E. Snohomish, WA 98296 306-668-0971 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 7952, Password: 12345 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 (c)) if you plan to call into meeting AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from May 3rd, 2007 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? Any updates on BiOp, other? 3. Osprey, Loon and Botanical Team updates 4. Elk Update Review site visit information Go over draft of easement document 5. "The Don Show" <ad> Updates on articles 515, 515, 517 for TRMP sections 6. Continue Chapter-by-Chapter TRMP Review (as needed) Process for incorporation of all comments/edits to date - update TRMP "format reorganization" 7. Other? 8. Evaluate meeting, set date and agenda for next meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes July 5, 2007 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm Jamie Riches House!  FINAL MEETING NOTES  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Anna Kopitov, and Ira McDaniel (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Sally Butts (USFWS); Don Gay (USFS); and Jamie Riche (PDSA Consulting).  NEXT MEETING DATES TRIG: Aug. 2, 2007, 9 am <ad> 2 pm, location (USFS Mountlake Terrace office) Future TRIG Meetings: Sept. 6, Oct. 4, Nov. 1, Dec. 6  ACTION ITEMS  Sally - Find out if the eagle delisting affects our plans, update TRIG Aug. 2 Marty - Review the Cooke Elk Forage study and Dons Forage Equivalency Units (from  Marty Tony -  the Settlement Agreement) to ensure consistency within your Elk Forage table Request the USFS Aug. 2, 2001 stereo coverage of ,,initial property Email full TRIG: "If you would like to give input on the easement language, contact me and Ill send you the worksheet we reviewed at the 7/5 TRIG mtg."  Tony - Confirm location of Aug. 2 TRIG meeting (USFS Mountlake Terrace office)  Ira - Talk with PSE legal and RMEF re: HMP agreement process; discuss Aug. 2  PREVIOUS <ad> STILL RELEVANT <ad> ACTION ITEMS Tony - email loon photos to full TRIG Tony - report website status (for posting notes) at 7/5 meeting Tony <ad> Work with Jacob to ensure the draft 505 plan is consistent with Section 8 language agreement Tony / Anna <ad> Resolve the Carex flava base mapping issue with Joetta  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG FINAL Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  Page 1 of 4   Ray & Tony <ad> Touch base with the new possible alternative property representation and  All <ad>  schedule pre-acquisition review (on hold pending current acquisition activities) In reviewing the TRMP land acquisition sections; consider how to list primary  and secondary decision criteria. Tony <ad> Forward information about all potential land acquisition parcels to elk teamlet  with a reminder about the need for confidentiality of all such information  Marty TRMP Reminders: When reformatting the TRMP for FERC, also collect the "rationale" sections from the older  versions into one rationale document for future administrators.  Find and incorporate eagle night roost survey protocols (Ch. 12)  Ensure all land acquisition articles are consistent with Section 8 weed management language  Enlarge the PSE engineering specifications in Appendix 7.1  BRICC / LICENCE UPDATE The last (June 27) BRICC meeting was cancelled. The USFWS BiOp has been submitted, with no surprises. Still waiting for the NOAA Fisheries BiOp. There will need to be some upcoming TRIG discussions around who does which surveys for murrelets and owls. We discussed the eagle de-listing, which happened after the BiOps were issued. This likely will not affect our activities since other regulations still protect the species, but Sally will follow up with USFWS to ask the question, and will update the TRIG at the Aug. 2 meeting. Note: We reviewed our friendly ,,wager from the last meeting and noted one correction: Marty 9/27, Don 10/12, Anna 10/31, Cary 11/1, Brock 11/21, Tony 12/20, Sally 1/5, Kathy 1/24, Jamie 2/14, Bob 4/1, Patrick 4/20. Winner earns bragging rights and a piece of PSE attire.  TEAMLET UPDATES Loon: As of the last survey, there were two loons mid-lake, but not near the platform. Tony shared that the materials (sod, etc) on the platform have not been disturbed, indicating the platform remains unused.  Osprey: The new platform is still in use. Tony would like to conduct an aerial survey, but helicopters are currently hard to come by (in use for wildfire season) ... will conduct a boat survey if an aerial survey isnt possible. All related signage remains in good condition.  Botanical Teamlet There hasnt been a Botanical Teamlet meeting in the last month. The PSE & Forrest Service meeting re: propagation is scheduled for July 11. Kathy also noted that the teamlet will be restarting the GIS work shortly (re: weeds & Carex flava). Rare Plants: Kathy spent time with a lichenologist, who was amazed by the areas proliferation of "Goblins Gold" (a moss which grows in very, very specific sites ... and one he hadnt seen before). She noted that our monitoring activities could turn up some interesting information on this plant.  Elk Land Acquisition & Coordination w/ CRAG: Tony noted that once we have control of  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG FINAL Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  Page 2 of 4   any parcel, we will need to coordinate any site work with the cultural resources advisory group. "Initial Property" Site Visit Report: Marty, Kathy and Anna conducted a site visit on the ,,initial property, specifically operability and management. Using the Elk Forage Equivalency Value (EFEV) table from the Settlement Agreement, Marty marked up a map to evaluate the parcels elk forage capabilities. He distributed the draft table outlining his findings, highlights are: the property currently has approx. 1180 EFEV units, and could have in excess of 1600 EFEV units if managed aggressively. Marty will recalculate the elk forage units for the property since it was noted that different values (esp. for deciduous forest) were used. The existing forage units were going to be re-calculated using the same values for forest types that were used in developing the license article. The bottom line is that the property would easily (with moderate management) meet the goals outlined in the Settlement Agreement. The property includes a lot of shrub wetlands and the team found several cross-drainage ditches and some fish on site. We discussed management planning around wetland areas, the opportunity for creek improvements, and permitting requirements. The general area where the property is located has evidence of fairly extensive and recent beaver activity. Roads on the property are generally in good condition, although one has had a culvert failure and will need attention. The owners have maintained a visual vegetative buffer between the highway and property; the areas vegetation is dense and so will be easy to maintain. Kathy shared that although there were several weeds on-site (daisy, foxglove, Canada thistle, etc), there are "none of the hardcore weeds." There are a lot of really dense forest stands <ad> we believe some have recently been logged and others would benefit from thinning (both for increased timber value and improved elk forage). Easement: Tony and Ira reviewed some other easements to get an idea of language options that have been used in similar situations. Ira built a checklist of possible easement language components for us to review and evaluate. We discussed these and marked each as "must," "would like," or "not needed." The TRIG reiterated its earlier consensus that acquiring the appropriate management rights (ensuring Article 503 compliance) meets the goals and intentions of the Settlement Agreement. We discussed our core values relative to land / easement acquisition: access, forage creation and the ability to manage forests; ability to manage or create pastures; the ability to control grazing and fencing; and the ability to restrict incompatible uses and developments. Several of the easement language options rely on Habitat Management Plan (HMP). We discussed the process for developing and coming to agreement on the HMP, and agreed that Ira will research this and share his findings at our next meeting. Ira shared that the appraisals of the property and easement values are currently scheduled for mid-August. If he has any initial estimates he can share by Aug. 2, hell bring that, too.  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG FINAL Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  Page 3 of 4   5.16 Mountain Goats, 5.17 Grizzly Bear Road Mgmt, and 5.18 Late Seral Forrest We did not have time for "The Don Show" on these topics, so this item has been moved to the Aug. 2 TRIG agenda PSE Website Tony shared that efforts to hire a webmaster are moving forward; hell keep us posted. HANDOUTS Agenda TRIG June 7, 2007 Meeting Notes "Initial Property" Elk Forage Values Table Baker River Article 503 <ad> DRAFT Easement Items for Discussion PARKING LOT Develop protocol for pre-acquisition field visit AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING August 2, 2007, 9 am <ad> 2 pm, Location USFS Mountlake Terrace Office 1. Welcome, review notes, action items, agenda 2. BRICC / License Update 3. Loon / Osprey and Botanical Teamlet Updates 4. Eagle delisting update from Sally 5. The Don Show: USFS plans relative to 5.16 <ad> 5.18 6. Elk Land Acquisition a. Easement language b. HMP agreement process 7. TRMP <ad> Whats left, next steps 8. Evaluate meeting, September 6 agenda  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG FINAL Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  Page 4 of 4    2007trig20070705.pdf en 