BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting June 7th, 2007 (9:00 p.m. - 2:00 p.m.) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 6153, Password: 12345 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 (c)) if you plan to call into meeting  AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from May 3rd, 2007 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? Any updates on WQC, 401, BiOp? 3. Osprey and Loon update 4. Elk Update 5. Botanical Teamlet Update from Botanical Teamlet meeting (Chapters 8, 9, and 10) 6. Continue Chapter-by-Chapter TRMP Review (starting at Chapter 13) Process for incorporation of all comments/edits to date TRMP “format reorganization” 7. Other? 8. Evaluate meeting, set date and agenda for next meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Baker River Project License Implementation  Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes June 7, 2007 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mountlake Terrace  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Anna Kopita, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Sally Butts (USFWS); Don Gay (USFS); and Jamie Riche (PDSA Consulting). NEXT MEETING DATES TRIG: July 5, 2007, 9 am – 2 pm, Jamie‟s House (9002 180th St. SE; Snohomish 98296) Future TRIG Meetings: Aug. 2, Sept. 6, Oct. 4, Nov. 1, Dec. 6 Elk Teamlet: TBD as needed; July 5 meeting will be focused on elk land acquisition ACTION ITEMS Sally check the status of the BiOps and update Tony Tony - email loon photos to full TRIG Kathy - by Friday, send Anna the most current pre-acquisition assessment form Jamie - send Tony directions to attach to 7/5 agenda Tony - send the “technical effects of plants used for elk forage” to all Tony - report website status (for posting notes) at 7/5 meeting PREVIOUS – STILL RELEVANT – ACTION ITEMS Ray & Tony – Touch base with the new possible alternative property representation and schedule pre-acquisition review Tony - Ask Don for a summary or direction to a reference about the USFS mgmt plan Marty - When reformatting the TRMP for FERC, also collect the “rationale” sections from the older versions into one rationale document for future administrators Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG FINAL Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  Page 1 of 4   Marty - Find and incorporate eagle night roost survey protocols (Ch. 12) Marty – Ensure all land acquisition articles are consistent with Section 8 weed management language Tony – Update Jacob re: Section 8 language agreement so he can ensure the draft plan is consistent Marty – Enlarge the PSE engineering specifications in Appendix 7.1 Tony / Anna – Resolve the Carex flava base mapping issue and send the final report to TRIG All – In reviewing the TRMP land acquisition sections; consider how to list primary and secondary decision criteria. Tony – Forward information about all potential land acquisition parcels to elk teamlet with a reminder about the need for confidentiality of all such information Welcome New Member We welcomed Sally Butts, who will be taking Lou Ellyn‟s place while Lou Ellyn is in D.C. BRICC / LICENCE UPDATE The next BRICC meeting is June 27; the group will be addressing updated timelines and the question of quorum definition. We read the tea leaves and started a friendly „wager‟ re: license issuance, “and the survey says!” … Marty 9/27, Don 10/12, Anna 10/31, Cary 11/1, Brock 11/21, Tony 12/20, Sally 1/5, Kathy 1/24, Jamie 2/14, Don 4/1, Patrick 4/20. Winner earns bragging rights and a piece of PSE attire. TEAMLET UPDATES Loon: Tony shared that there have been four surveys of the nest platform. They have seen loons on the lake (not in the vicinity of the platform) during all but the last survey, but no nesting activity. Signage is up: three on the float lines and one large sign on the shoreline at the boat ramp. Osprey: There were six pairs on the lake in the last survey, including one natural nest and a pair in the new platform. Elk: Tony shared that Ira (PSE) has a schedule in place to really move forward on acquisition. Ask Tony for more details. We discussed management activities, especially in the event of an easement rather than outright purchase. We want to have flexibility during negotiations, while remaining clear and focused on what works best when managing land for elk. We noted that in the event of an easement, the easement holder (PSE) should have authority at least equal to the property owners for property management to ensure the acquisition is able to meet our elk objectives. As negotiations move forwards, this group will have multiple opportunities to review the language before anything is signed. We discussed the need for an Elk meeting in the next month to review any proposal. We then noted that since we are moving toward purchase (fee title or easement), this meeting really should be a meeting of the full TRIG and decided to reserve the July 5 TRIG meeting for discussion of elk land acquisition. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG FINAL Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  Page 2 of 4   We agreed that acquisition of less than the targeted acres and forage equivalency units for the “initial acquisition” may be appropriate, with TRIG discussion / decision. If some of the initial acquisition money is not spent on the “initial acquisition” it goes into the general elk fund. Botanical Teamlet Kathy shared that the botanical teamlet met Monday 6/4. They reviewed the TRMP‟s chapters eight through ten. USFS and PSE will meet July 11 re: the need for locally derived native plants for re-vegetation efforts due to ground-disturbing projects; they will discuss which projects, how many plants, when needed, current sources. We noted the potentially limited re-vegetation needs since many areas will naturally re-vegetate with local, native plants within a year. There will be site visits later this summer related to specific site management plans. We‟ll incorporate the teamlet‟s edits of Chapters 8-10 into the next „formal‟ draft of the TRMP. 5.16 Mountain Goats, 5.17 Grizzly Bear Road Mgmt, and 5.18 Late Seral Forrest We discussed Don‟s plans relative to these articles and agreed that a visual / verbal report with highlights captured in TRIG meeting notes will suffice for now. A more formal document may be needed in future. Brock expressed a desire to be “involved” in the mountain goat article, as he wanted to relay proposed plans by WDFW’s mountain goat expert, Cliff Rice.  TRMP Review Since Don provided an email with input after Tony distributed the draft TRMP, we circled back to discuss and incorporate his feedback. We then resumed the chapter-by-chapter review, starting with Chapter 13. After a lengthy discussion, we agreed for Marty to use the USFWS BiOps to add language to chapter 13 … noting a buffer distance around a bald eagle nest site (800 m?) that would trigger concern and a TRIG meeting to assess current / ongoing activities and identify potential future activities that could adversely affect the nesting pair. Chapter 14 – Marty will leave this chapter alone for the upcoming draft. He will include monitoring / reporting verbiage in the appropriate sections (502, 503, 504, 506, 507, and 513). We can then review chapter 14 to assess our approach and appropriate level of detail. Brock expressed his desire to continue to use HEP as a monitoring tool for some of the articles. He acknowledged that we did not have enough money to accomplish a HEP on every article, but wanted to reduce the number of HEP models we use instead lowering the quality of the HEP monitoring. For example, we could use cover type analysis for the monitoring of elk forage, which would lessen the cost of monitoring.  Next Steps: Tony, Cary, Anna, Marty and Kathy will review the TRMP in light of the FEIS and assess the level of detail that is appropriate in the TRMP given our latest understanding of the role of this document. Marty will incorporate all the edits / corrections but won‟t yet split it into Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG FINAL Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  Page 3 of 4   separate plans. We will come back to the TRMP on our Sept. 6 meeting. PSE Website Don asked if PSE is going to get back in the habit of posting meeting notes to the web. Cary shared that PSE‟s webmaster left the company and we aren‟t the only ones to notice. He will be in a meeting later today where he can bring up this issue. Tony will give us an update at our July 5 meeting. HANDOUTS Agenda TRIG May 3, 2007 Meeting Notes PARKING LOT Develop protocol for pre-acquisition field visit AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING July 5, 2007, 9 am – 2 pm, Jamie‟s House 1. Welcome, review notes, action items, agenda 2. BRICC / License Update 3. Loon / Osprey and Botanical Teamlet Updates 4. The Don Show: USFS plans relative to 5.16 – 5.18 5. Elk Land Acquisition (main focus of this meeting) 6. Continue Chapter-by-Chapter TRMP Review (starting at chapter __) if needed 7. Evaluate meeting, August 2 agenda  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG FINAL Meeting Notes, 9/19/2007  Page 4 of 4    2007trig20070607.pdf en 