BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting Meeting Agenda March 21, 2007 11:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Upper Skagit Indian Tribal Office, Sedro Wooley, WA  Agenda 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.  6. 7. 8. 9.  Welcome and Introductions Review Action Items FSC presentation Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee Status report on early implementation of Settlement Agreement projects LB gate cars LB Power House Spawning beaches-Access? Hatchery Monitoring report status Site stabilization project status Tacoma Power-Cowlitz River Project Evaluate Meeting Define Next Steps   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting March 21, 2007 11:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Upper Skagit Indian Tribal Office, Sedro Woolley, WA  Draft Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE): email is elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com and phone number is (425) 462-3609. PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Connie Freeland (PSE), Jan Hollenbeck (U.S. Forest Service), Ron Kent (Army Corps) Scott Schulyer (USIT), John-Paul Shanahan (USIT), Chris Miss (Northwest Archaeological Associates), Kelly Bush (ERCI), Tamela Smart (ERCI), PRESENT BY CONFERENCE CALL: Robert Whitlam (SHPO), Heather Miller (HRA)  March 21 Agenda: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.  Welcome and Introductions Review Action Items FSC presentation Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee Status report on early implementation of Settlement Agreement projects LB gate cars LB Power House Spawning beaches-Access Hatchery 6. Monitoring report status and ARPA permit status 7. Site stabilization project status 8. Tacoma Power-Cowlitz River Project 9. Discuss Site surface collecting and monitoring in general 10. Baker Resort 11. Evaluate Meeting 12. Define Next Steps   Welcome and Introductions Welcome to all. Kelly is facilitating with Tamela from ERCI as note taker. Rob and Heather have joined us on the phone. Review Action Items: Access to spawning beach will be updated for possible May site visit Feedback on filter fabric for stabilization Kelly will work with Tribes to get the HPMP back on their radars Elizabeth will connect with Chris on Annual Work Plan Elizabeth will bring info about LIDAR to next meeting Floating Surface Collector: PowerPoint from Cary Feldman Ron asked if we had anything that showed the phase one of the "gulper" that could be archived with this presentation to archive the existing equipment. Discussing followed with support for that idea. Discussion of Lisa Migetto's book on the Fish Story and can we get more discs for distribution – members had interest in this. Baker River Project Video (Gulper) Viewed the video. Ron asked if there are any other presentations on the earlier technology. Elizabeth and Connie will look into getting copies of previous works. Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee: (Connie) Hand out and Connie reviewed Jan asked if we had considered the acquisition of the Elk Habitat, Discussion followed and members agree that Elizabeth should continue to pursue relationships inside the decision making process and members would like to provide any support she needs. Scott agreed that we need more info as the Tribe needs opportunity to comment on purchase. They will need to consider whether TCP study is required. Scott requested Consultation prior to acquisition. Elizabeth will find out more about the process from Tony Did we need to survey for Loon Platforms? During this discussion Rob wanted to make sure that he is providing the kind of expertise to help PSE become more aware of cultural resource issues. Elizabeth is concentrating on ground work of meeting with people. The group showed consensus in offering support to Elizabeth where she needs it. Status Report on early implementation DC Car: disassembly has begun AC Car will remain for at least a year and we are considering how the new car can work with the old car in place. Lower Baker Powerhouse Elizabeth and Scott have discussed the potential for more archaeological and ethnographic work Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting March 21, 2007 Page 2 of 4   Spawning Beaches Access is worse now but will get better later in the spring. We need to plan a site visit to assist in meaningful and thoughtful management decisions. Jan reported that piping underneath the beaches has asbestos and they might want to pull them out. They are considering capping with cement. We need a field visit maybe we can combine with a shorter meeting. Our meeting place for April and May are not secured. Hatchery: There may be “no effect” here. Jan reminded the group that we need to improve the process and be more involved. Elizabeth wonders if the survey is adequate. Chris will be able to speak to the hatchery expansion more at the next meeting We may need to survey/monitor outside of the existing fence Monitoring report status: Jan is considering a 5 year permit with annual work plans Discussion of how we plan to monitor, what kind of data will we collect and in what format. We need to work on/include treatment plans in the HPMP work Discussion about site treatment plans include ranking. The monitoring report will help guide the site treatments. April or May possible technical meeting about the treatment plan/s – Elizabeth will organize this meeting Elizabeth will bring in Russell Holter to determine if the maintenance guidelines considered a treatment plan for structures? Site stabilization project status 3-4 week delay due to access issues We’ll be using PSE placement equipment and operator 400 ton of quarry spalls in truck and trailers Funding mechanism in place just waiting for signatures, delayed as it went through the wrong channels. Filter fabric discussed again. Chris’s team will collect and take pictures before during and after. Mid May is drop dead date Elizabeth gave a ppt from Tacoma Power about the Cowlitz project they used erosion pins, discussion of patterns between and within the sites. Discussion of reservoir erosion effects and articles that address this. Chris would like to free up Charlie for a geomorph study on Shannon where we encounter a great deal of silt. Baker Lake Resort Discussion: Jan will keep group informed Next Meeting April 18, 2007 Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting March 21, 2007 Page 3 of 4   Evaluate Meeting Good: Presentations Facilitation In time! Great location New People! Technical help was good  Improvements: Veggie lunch Missed the Sauk-Suiattle and the Swinomish Missed Bob M.  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting March 21, 2007 Page 4 of 4    2007crag20070321.pdf en 