 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting March 6th, 2008 (9:00 p.m. – 2:00 p.m.) WDFW Mill Creek Office 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard Mill Creek, Washington 98012-1296 Telephone (425) 775-1311 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 2821, Password: 4567 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 ©) if you plan to call into meeting AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from February 7th, 2008 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? 3. Decisions Required at Today’s meeting (Detailed Information Attached (if needed)): None 1. Decision Item #1 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent) 2. Decision Item #2 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent)  Please Designate Proxy to express your view if you can not attend. 4. Loon and Botanical Teams – updates  Loon Platform update – Anna  Botanical update – Anna and Kathy 5. Elk Update  Easement update – Ira  Pre-acquisition survey report – Tony, Kathy  Report-out: ARG/TRIG discussion for Aquatic Riparian - Tony  Additional properties discussion – Ray, Tony, Ira  Maps of damage concern areas - Dave 6. TRMP Update – Edits and discussion about the following plans:  Finish Forest, Elk, Wetland, them move on to Botanical plans – Marty  Next steps? New format? 7. Other?  Land Acquisition Process development 8. Evaluate meeting, set location (WDFW Mill Creek) and agenda for next meeting (April 15th, 2008?) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes March 6, 2008 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Anna Kopitov, Haley Edwards, Cary Feldmann, Ira McDaniel, and Paul Wetherbee (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Brock Applegate by phone and Dave Geroux (WDFW); Ray Croswell and Bob Nelson (RMEF); Don Gay (USFS); Chris Madson (NWIFC); Chris Danilson (Sauk-Suiattle); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); and Lyn Wiltse (PDSA Consulting). NEXT MEETING: May 1, 2008 Future Meetings: No meeting in April. Otherwise meet first Thursdays through 2008. ACTION ITEMS  Dave - Let Ira know ASAP if WDFW is okay with borrowing from elk habitat funds in order to survey a potential and purchase that meets other land values.  Tony - Send out WDFW core area map to all.  Dave - Send shape file for that map to Tony to distribute to all.  Paul - Connect with Greta re: USFS / PSE financial process upon license issuance  Tony - Send .pdf of property map to Dave so he can check on acceptability for elk funding.  All - Let Tony know if you want to be part of the property prioritization process teamlet. PREVIOUS – STILL RELEVANT – ACTION ITEMS  Tony - Coordinate pre-acquisition survey on alternate property.  Ira/Cary - Meet with Tribes to more clearly understand their interests relative to easements.  Paul - Add footnote to decision flow chart (written explanation of “no”, see below).  Paul - Follow up to ensure meeting minutes are available online or via a CD.  Marty - In 2008, work with Tony/Paul on a pre-acquisition checklist for PSE to document compliance with S.A./License … share w/ TRIG (info only) when complete.  Tony/Paul - Draft a proposal for TRMP language re: financial processes (budget, audit, etc). Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 1 of 6 BRICC / LICENSE UPDATES Cary reported that FERC is still waiting for the NMFS Bi-Op. FERC says they have everything written, so they will be able to move quickly, assuming there are no inconsistencies with the Bi- Op. On Mar. 4 Steve Fransen told Cary that the Bi-Op was still undergoing internal review at NMFS. Steve said these changes are more in the nature of form than substance. Cary also recently learned from FERC that we still have a contested proceeding – Diking District 17 (who was not a part of the recent settlement with the cities and 2 other diking districts). If we don’t clear this up it would result, according to Steve Hocking of FERC, in a delay of approximately a month and a half. On March 11 the board of Diking District 17 will meet and discuss dropping the protest. The BRICC didn’t meet in February due to an insufficient number of agenda items. At this point they are scheduled to meet on March 26. LOON TEAMLET Anna reported that the Loon Platform was installed in Lake Shannon on February 25. She will be going back out to work on making it more level. Other adjustments will be made when water levels come up. The main changes to the platform this year are:  Removed netting from the top  Different ramp  Addition of alders, stick material, mosses, grasses, rushes, and a fern. Anna was not able to reduce the freeboard other than a bit by adding weight. It is currently 8-12 inches. Don suggested looking for ways to keep the freeboard as low as possible. We looked at a photo of the platform and the sign used to keep boats away from the platform. BOTANICAL TEAMLET Anna reported that we will be doing more rare plant surveys at the hatchery site. We are also updating the methodologies for surveying carex flava. Haley compiled a comprehensive Baker plant list from all our studies and surveys into a master list. TRMP UPDATE Marty announced that he and Kathy have reformatted a couple of our management plans to be consistent with the proposed structure to be used across all of the resource groups. He will walk us through these converted plans at our May 1 meeting. We will review them from the perspective of format and approach at that time. Marty will also propose an outline for implementation procedures at that time. ELK UPDATE Initial Land Acquisition/Easement Update Ira reported that the owners of the potential parcel have several concerns about our proposed agreement. He summarized their objections and suggestions: Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 2 of 6 They want only a temporary easement of no greater than 50 years. They also would allow a transfer of development rights (owners would reserve rights to one or two residences only – within the easement – and a caretaker’s quarters). They would agree to keep the hayfields in active production (no conversion to forest use). They intend for livestock to be on the property May 1 – Oct. 31. During that time they would keep elk out by maybe putting up temporary fencing. Elk would be allowed on the property the rest of the year. These dates and hazing are concerns. Any proposed habitat improvement projects would have to be subject to the review and approval of owners. There would be no guarantee that our projects would be approved. Access to PSE and contractors would only be allowed during Nov 1 – Apr 30 for elk monitoring, and during other times of the year for agreed upon improvement projects. We could negotiate the right to do surveys from time to time to monitor the activities of the land owners. Ira asked team members if these terms are acceptable in terms of meeting the requirements for initial land acquisition. After some discussion we concluded that this falls short of that. We discussed next steps including follow up with the owners and tribes. Pre-Acquisition Survey Support and Aquatic/Riparian We also discussed the possibility and process for co-mingling funds to potentially purchase another specific piece of property. We could do this within TRIG and also with aquatic/riparian habitat funds. There may be opportunities to partner also with other entities. Tony reviewed the current buckets of funding: Capital Funds Available: 502 Forest Habitat: $450K 503: Elk Habitat: $3.7 million 504 Wetland Habitat: $340K 505 Aquatic Habitat $9.9 million Next Steps: PSE will draft a proposal about how we might purchase this parcel (not using elk funds) and we will review this at our April 15 meeting. Note: These funds only become available AFTER license issuance. Dave will determine whether WDFW would support borrowing from the elk fund. Tony will follow up with Jacob about touching base with SRSC. This will be done as part of the Article 505 teamlet. We also reviewed three other potential properties. We agreed to pursue all three. Ira will make it happen! Once we get access approval our pre-acquisition team will be ready to conduct surveys. We will discuss these again after we have the pre-acquisition survey data – likely at our May Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 3 of 6 meeting. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 4 of 6 Map of Damage Concern Areas Dave showed us a map outlining what WDFW sees as acceptable for elk habitat. Purchase of any properties in the core area would be a “slam dunk”. Anything in the peripheral area would likely be acceptable – depending on browse damage. Anything outside of that will have to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. The goal is to move elk back into the core area. LAND ACQUISITION PROCESS Many of the properties we might purchase have multi-habitat types and various timelines associated with them. Tony suggested forming a teamlet to define a basic property prioritization purchase process. PSE would prepare an outline to start with. This would include how to deal with habitat that doesn’t fall within elk areas (e.g., riparian). Several people said they would like to be included in the teamlet, including (please let Tony know if you volunteered. The names were not recorded). HANDOUTS  Agenda for this meeting  Notes from February 6, 2008 meeting  Pre-acquisition survey data sheets and map of a prospective property PARKING LOT  Develop protocol for pre-acquisition field visit AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING May 1, 2008, 9 am – 2 pm, Mill Creek 1. Welcome, review agenda, notes, and action items 2. BRICC / License Update 3. Decisions Required 4. Elk Land Acquisition Update a. Easement update - Ira b. Alternate properties list / status - Ray, Tony c. Pre-acquisition survey reports d. Property acquisition process 5. New format for Management Plans 6. Other? 7. Evaluate meeting, set next meeting agenda MEETING EVALUATION: What worked well:  Got out early  Number of people present  Brock on phone  Lyn  Ira  Ray’s presentation  New phone Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 5 of 6  