Baker River Project License Implementation Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee Agenda March 26, 2008 from 9:00 am <ad> 3:00 pm WDFW Offices 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard, Mill Creek, WA Conference Call-in Information: MeetingPlace Main Number 425-456-2500 Toll Free Number 888-228-0484 Meeting ID: 123456 Password: 802906  9:00 <ad> 9:30  Introductions Review Notes, Agenda Action Items  9:30 <ad> 10:15  License Schedule Update Status of NMFS Bi-Op Revised Hatchery Schedule Resource Group and BRCC Decision Process Charts  10:15 <ad> 10:25 BRCC Norms Suggested Proxy Notification Process Other logistics to help set us up for success  10:25 <ad> 10:35 Break  10:35 <ad> 10:50 PMF Update  10:50 <ad> 11:30 Update from Resource Groups TRIG, CRAG, RRG  11:35 <ad> 12:15 Lunch  12:15 <ad> 1:15  Update from Resource Groups (continued) ARG o FSC, Adult Trap  1:15 <ad> 2:00 Next Steps Next meeting Agenda Date: 4/30/08 Evaluate Meeting  Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Agenda, March 26, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 2   Directions to WDFW, 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard, Mill Creek: From Interstate 5, take exit #183 From the south, turn right onto 164th Street From the north, turn left onto 164th Street Go east on 164th St. about one mile (passing Martha Lake on the left) At the bottom of a long hill, turn left onto Mill Creek Boulevard and go about 1/2 mile The WDFW office is on the left (west) side of the street Parking is limited; if necessary, park across the street at the shopping center Check in at the front desk and let them know you are attending the BRICC meeting in the Large Conference Room; they will direct you Paper copies: Arn Thoreen, Bob Helton, Patrick Goldsworthy  Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Agenda, March 26, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 2 of 2   Baker River Project License Implementation  Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee FINAL Meeting Notes March 26, 2008 9:00 am - 1:00 pm WDFW Office, Mill Creek  PRESENT Ed Schild, Cary Feldmann, and Arnie Aspelund (PSE); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Rich Johnson, Dave Geroux (WDFW); Bob Helton (Citizen); Rick Bogey (Skagit Co.); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Alice Kelly (Dept. of Ecology); Jon-Paul Shannahan (Upper Skagit); Lou Ellyn Jones by phone (USFWS); Greta Movasaghi by phone (USFS); Lyn Wiltse and Jamie Riche, facilitation (PDSA Consulting, Inc). Kathleen's Contact Information: 425.462.3831, Kathleen.Maddox@pse.com  NEXT BRICC MEETING DATE: April 30, 2008 2008 Meetings: 9am<ad>3pm, WDFW Office in Mill Creek (or via tele-video conference): 5/28, 6/25, 7/23, 8/27, 9/24, 10/22, 11/19, 12/17 TODAY'S AGENDA TOPICS Notes, Agenda, Action Items License and Resource Group Updates BRICC Norms and Proxy Notification Process PMF Update Next Steps, Next Meeting Agenda, Mtg. Evaluation Concept of the Day: "Dilbert Coordinates," which are represented as a big dot on a little map  NEW ACTION ITEMS  All Review, confirm primary and back-up representatives on the BRICC contact sheet.  Arnie Get detailed map of the hatchery and water supply (more than a dot) to Greta.  Cary  Follow-up on Diking District 17 withdrawal re: protest to the license.  Kathleen Update and distribute BRICC contact list.  Kathleen Test drive options to improve clarity for folks who call in to the new phone. Kathleen Send out notification w/ instructions for finding the PMP/PMF report on FERCs website.  Paul Let BRICC members know who Ed (as Chairman) designates as the point person for  logistical support to these meetings.  Rick Call Daryl Hamburg re: protest.  Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Draft Notes, March 26, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 4   OLD, STILL RELEVANT, ACTION ITEMS Linda Email out ACE reservoir design requirements. LICENSE UPDATE: The BRICC is still waiting for the BiOp from NMFS. Ed Schild shared that Steve Fransen has completed his work, and the BiOp is undergoing NMFS legal review. Steve Hocking (FERC) is drafting the Baker license and is asking if the issue with Diking District 17 has been resolved. The Diking District was to have met on March 11 to discuss withdrawing their protest, but PSE has not received any notification to indicate the issue has been resolved. If they dont withdraw their protest, our license remains "contested" and the license order must then be written by FERC attorneys rather than FERC staff. This would delay the process by probably a couple months. Rick Bogey is going to give Daryl Hamburg a call, and PSE will call the Diking District directly to make sure they understand the outcome of not withdrawing the protest, to be sure that the license isnt unintentionally delayed. Skagit County Flood Control Mgmt. District Rick shared information about a flood control management district Skagit County is assembling to evaluate flood control and salmon benefits. The Advisory Group is 15 members appointed by county commissioners, and there are three technical groups. There will be a workshop on March 31, 2008 at 4:00 pm, at 1800 College Way in Mt. Vernon. Agency reps and citizens are welcome to attend. Revised Hatchery Schedule Cary reported that design work is ongoing but we have to delay construction due to permitting issues (Special Use Permit: SUP) related to our delay in receiving the license. When the SUP is renewed, we might be able to do some construction related to water supply. While we are all disappointed about the delay, appreciation was expressed for all the design work implemented ahead of license issuance. Greta explained that they (USFS) discussed this matter with their regional office and they now believe they could issue the SUP in relatively short order (a number of weeks). Unfortunately, we are now outside the window to do construction other than on the water supply. USFS has the ability to amend the permit boundary as necessary. Arnie will get Greta documentation showing the exact location of the hatchery and water supply, including the FS boundary and project boundary. BRICC NORMS Lyn walked the group through the updated BRICC norms. The group approved the update to Section D, Number 12, which was changed to indicate that members who are unable to attend a meeting will notify the Chairman if they will be represented by proxy and if so, by whom. As a group, we reviewed the norms and made the following recommendations: Update the location (Mill Creek) Address video conferencing (PSE video locations: Bellevue, Burlington, Olympia, Tacoma); keep telephone call-in available Clarification around who will act as Chairmans designee for logistical support Attendance confirmation for lunch orders Norm 14 will be changed to require presenters to email presentations in advance so that phone participants have equal access and those who want a printed copy can bring their own  Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Draft Notes, March 26, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 2 of 4   We discussed the possibility of meeting next time via PSEs satellite video conference locations. PSE will coordinate logistics and let BRICC members know whats available for the next meeting. DECISION PROCESS / FLOWCHART At the last meeting, Paul distributed a copy of article 601 along with a one-page flow chart outlining his understanding of how a decision would get elevated from a resource group to the BRCC. He took that flowchart to the Resource Groups for review (How resource groups elevate issues to BRCC). He is on vacation today, so this topic was moved to our next meeting for final review / discussion. PROBABLE MAXIMUM PRECIPITATION / PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD Ed shared that FERCs Part 12 process is about dam safety, including control systems that could have impact on structures. The process looks at likely effects of maximum precipitation / maximum floods, and the probabilities under review are in the nature of 1:10,000 to 1:1-million. PSE got 80% through the PMP / PMF process, the rules changed, and they had to start over. Part 12 calls for inspections every five years including structural, seismic, signage (anything related to safety). Next steps: 3D mathematical calculation of overtopping at upper and lower baker and the impact to structures and mitigation (overtopping isnt necessarily bad as long as the structure remains intact). FERC also wants PSE to redo all the inundation maps with the new process. The structural analysis should take about six months. The study will be posted to FERCs website when complete. A board of consultants / industry experts will be reviewing the study and providing feedback. PSE will then come to agreement with FERC re: what they will do and when. Costs for this work are PSEs "cost of doing business" (public safety) and are separate from the settlement agreement. TRIG UPDATE Progress has been made toward the initial elk land purchase for elk habitat. WDFW shared a map of core and peripheral areas and the team discussed elk ,,browse damage areas (which are to be avoided). The loon platform has been changed in the hopes that it will be more attractive to the birds, and was reinstalled on Lake Shannon Feb. 25. The botanical teamlet continues to work on the TRMP, which Cary noted is a compendium of all plans rather than one stand-alone plan. CRAG UPDATE Lyn shared information about the Cultural Resources Advisory Group, which continues to work on the Historical Properties Management Plan. They had a small meeting this month; many people participated by phone. The quorum discussion over the last several months is of special interest to them; they are discussing how to operationalize the quorum / proxy rule for decisions. RRG UPDATE Most discussions at the last RRG meeting revolved around the re-development of the Baker Lake Resort. They will be operating the resort on a shorter schedule this year. They discussed concerns about impact to owls and Marbled Murrelet. ARG UPDATE Arnie walked the group through a 3D rendering of the 60% design for the new hatchery facility and answered questions about the structure and design process. He explained that at the ARG meeting on Feb. 12 they reviewed the decision flowchart process, the status of the major capital projects underway and the  Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Draft Notes, March 26, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 3 of 4   gates/milestones PSE will use to assess progress. The group heard updates on fish passage and hatchery operations. The bulk of the meeting was spent in review of the 60% hatchery design. PSE has received comments and will be integrating them into the 90% plan. Cary reported PSE is working on the design of the adult trap. They have integrated CRAG suggestions, which were mainly aesthetic and have not changed the function of the facility. Most of this facility will be enclosed in buildings to protect operations. PSE will develop signage and video displays to help tell the story of the facility (I&E). We will reuse as much as possible from the original operations (e.g. fish holding ponds). The FSC is in the water, floating and operational (Wahoo!). Cary shared a brief video that was filmed onsite March 14 showing the FSC. The June 10 meeting will be up at the Baker Lodge for FSC tours. CORPS GENERAL INVESTIGATION UPDATE At our January meeting, we hoped to hear a GI update today from USACE; without an representative here from the Corps today, that item was moved to our next meeting. MEETING EVALUATION What Went Well Food (we love Arnie!) Project videos and still shots Extraordinary facilitation PMP / PMF report Good discussions Out early What to Do Differently Video conferencing? "What Up" with the new phones? Need better clarity, maybe more mics AGENDA TOPICS, NEXT MEETING Review / Discuss Decision Flow Charts License and Project Updates Final Review, Discussion <ad> Decision Flowchart (Paul) USACE: GI Update and ACE Measures Evaluation Future Meeting Topics: Presentation / Update on GI process Project scheduling relative to license issuance (what if we dont have a license by Q1, Q2, etc.)  Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Draft Notes, March 26, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 4 of 4    2008bricc20080326.pdf en 