BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting October 2nd, 2008 (9:00 p.m. – 2:00 p.m.) WDFW Mill Creek Office 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard Mill Creek, Washington 98012-1296 Telephone (425) 775-1311 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 2821, Password: 4567 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 (m)) if you plan to call into meeting  AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from August 7th, 2008 meeting. 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates. 3. Decisions Required at Today’s Meeting: No 1. Decision Item #1: 2. Decision Item #2:  Please Designate Proxy to express your view if you cannot attend. 4. Land Acquisition Process  Update on Land Acquisition Process Teamlet meeting – Tony and Anna 5. Elk Update  Update on Property X offer – Ira, Ray  Alternate properties list/data base / status – Ira, Ray, Tony  Next steps 6. Botanical Teamlet update  Teamlet update – Anna and Kathy 7. TRMP Update  New Format of plans – Marty and Kathy  Next steps? 8. Loon Update  Teamlet update - Anna 9. Evaluate meeting, set location (WDFW Mill Creek) and agenda for next meeting (Nov. 4th, 2008)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes October 2, 2008 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Ira McDaniel, Paul Wetherbee, Anna Kopitov, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); David Geroux (WDFW); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); Don Gay (USFS); Chris Danilson (Sauk-Suiattle); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA Consulting). DECISIONS  There were no formal decisions presented for consideration today. NEXT MEETING: November 6, 2008 ACTION ITEMS  Tony Bring an updated accounting of TRIG funds (in “today’s dollars” and less any expenditures to date) to the 11/4 meeting  Tony Send out the LAP flowchart and draft habitat criteria matrix for review  All Provide feedback re: LAP flowchart to Haley by 10/29  All Provide feedback re: habitat criteria matrix to Anna by 10/29  Marty - Update TRMP Format Status Sheet and Elk Plan, bring to 11/4 meeting  Marty / Kathy – Conduct a pre-acquisition survey of “Property Y” PREVIOUS – STILL RELEVANT – ACTION ITEMS  Dave Let Ira know where the Elk Core area follows legal boundaries (rivers, ridges, etc)  Ira/Cary - Meet with Tribes to more clearly understand their interests relative to easements.  Tony/Paul – Draft a proposal for TRMP language re: financial processes (budget, audit, etc). UPDATE ON PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS: Dave shared that the high-damage map is not available in GIS form. He will continue to work with Ira and Mike (WDFW) to identify the legal boundaries of the elk core area. BRICC / LICENSE UPDATES Paul shared that the BRICC has not met since our last TRIG meeting. Cary sent an email out this Baker River Project Relicense FINAL Meeting Notes, 10/2/2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 4   week announcing that FERC has our license in their pipeline and it really could be issued ‘any day, ’ so PSE is busy working on the “day of issuance plan.” Once the license is issued, the BRICC will become the BRCC (no longer “interim”); they will officially charter the TRIG, and the TRIG will need to formally adopt all the decisions we’ve made during this “interim” status. Since license issuance is ‘imminent,’ we looked back at our friendly wagers, and noted that the following folks chose dates that are coming up soon: Jacob 10/11, Don 10/12, Anna 10/31. Paul also shared that PSE is offering well-received public tours of the Baker facility. Free workshop on carbon sequestration and the carbon market 10/15 Lou Ellyn invited anyone who is interested to attend a free USFWS workshop about forest lands, carbon sequestration, and the carbon market. The session will bring biologists and policy folks together to evaluate the possible benefits (funding incentives) re: carbon cap and trade system. LAND ACQUISITION PROCESS TEAMLET The L.A.P. teamlet met to refine the process and update the flow chart based on feedback from the last TRIG mtg. Tony shared the updated flow chart and we reviewed it briefly. Anna shared a matrix she drafted to identify habitat types and locations that would be most / least desirable for each resource group’s land acquisition planning. This matrix helps us meet the requirements outlined in our management plan (to identify our site selection criteria and procedures). It also helps us prioritize potential properties in a GIS search. Tony will send out the LAP flowchart and habitat criteria matrix with these notes. Please review and provide feedback by 10/29. ELK PROPERTIES Note: Because the August TRIG mtg included discussion/decision about a potential land purchase, there are two sets of notes for the August meeting: a public set, which has identifying details removed, and a confidential set, which memorializes the details of the decision. Property X: At our August meeting, the TRIG authorized PSE to make an offer on this property. Ira shared that there were some delays within PSE’s legal department re: the exact wording of our offer. We discussed this and Ira doesn’t expect this to be repeated with future offers. Ira and Ray met with the “Property X” landowners and presented an offer within the parameters TRIG set in August. The property owners are currently evaluating the offer, and Ira expects to be able to provide another update at our November meeting. Property Y: The TRIG discussed another property, which we’re calling Property Y for the purposes of these notes (contact Tony for details). Ira has approached the landowner, so knows that they are open to potential sale, and would allow us to conduct a pre-acquisition survey. The TRIG discussed this property; Dave noted that WDFW is comfortable with this property being managed for elk. This property’s value would exceed any money we might have left over from the purchase of Property X (assuming that occurs). We would be considering this property for purchase with post-license issuance funds. The TRIG authorized a pre-acquisition survey on this property. Marty and Kathy will schedule this as soon as possible. BOTANICAL TEAMLET Baker River Project Relicense FINAL Meeting Notes, 10/2/2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 2 of 4   The Botanical Teamlet met 9/16 and reviewed the “new and improved” management plans. They also updated the plants of special status list. Kathy noted that this list changes often. When we originally evaluated the project area, there were four listed species known to exist in the project area; now there are six. They also reviewed the Carex flava plan and discussed the process for acquiring local native plant seeds for restoration efforts. The teamlet will meet again 10/22 to address noxious weeds and Carex flava Procedures. TRMP Marty shared a table that showed the status of the plans/procedures associated with each license article. We reviewed the table together and verified that we will prepare a separate plan and procedures document for each terrestrial article. Marty will revise this status document to help us track deadlines associated with each and will distribute this prior to our 11/4 meeting. Next TRMP steps:  The botanical teamlet will continue to flesh out the policy/process documents and plans for the botanical articles, and will bring those to the November TRIG meeting.  Marty will work on the Elk policy/procedure; assuming the license contains no surprises, we’ll review this at our November meeting.  Paul will continue to work on the funding agreement with USFS.  Anna / Tony will work on a draft for the USFS projects accountability / tracking process. LOON UPDATE Anna shared our loon plans with the leaders of the other resource groups. Arnie (Aquatics Resource Group) noted that one of our planned platform sites is close to an area of high fishing / recreational use. We discussed this and decided to keep the plan as-is because the timing of greatest recreational use probably won’t have a significant impact on nesting activity. We will monitor this during our regular loon surveys and adjust if needed. Anna is also looking at best options for anchoring and will bring specs to our 11/4 meeting for TRIG review. HANDOUTS  Agenda and August 2008 meeting notes (confidential and public versions)  Land Acquisition Process Teamlet outline and draft flow chart  Status of Baker River Project Terrestrial Resource Plans, 10/1/2008 PARKING LOT  Develop protocol for pre-acquisition field visit AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING November 6, 2008, 9 am – 2 pm, Mill Creek 1. Welcome, review agenda, notes, and action items 2. BRICC / license updates – Review TRIG budget 3. Elk land acquisition update: Properties X & Y, Alternate Properties 4. Land acquisition process teamlet update 5. TRMP Review – Elk Plan 6. Botanical Teamlet update Baker River Project Relicense FINAL Meeting Notes, 10/2/2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 3 of 4    2008trig20081002.pdf en 