 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting Meeting Agenda January 16, 2008 11:00 a.m. – 3:00 pm Upper Skagit Offices, Sedro Woolley, WA Lunch 12:30 p.m. Agenda 1. Review notes/agenda/action items for December 5, 2007 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? Resource Group decision-making process overview 3. UB Barge “Gulper” and pass-through pipelinegh PSE proposed plan UB Barge (“Gulper”) & pass-through pipeline 4. Lunch 5. Status report on Settlement Agreement projects FSC UB Hatchery Adult Trap LB Power House Channel Creek Spawning Beaches 6. Review FS NEPA process timeline for stabilization project 7. Evaluate Meeting 8. Define Next Steps-All BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 16, 2008 11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m. Upper Skagit Offices, Sedro Woolley, WA, WA Final Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE): email is elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com and phone number is (425) 462-3609. PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Paul Weatherbee (Puget Sound Energy), Bob Mierendorf (National Park Service), Scott Schuyler, (Upper Skagit Indian Tribe), Heather Miller (HRA), and Candace Wilson (Facilitator, PDSA Consulting). January 16 Agenda: 1. Review notes/agenda/action items for December 5, 2007 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates?  Resource Group decision-making process overview 3. UB Barge (―Gulper‖) and pass-through pipeline  PSE proposed plan 4. Lunch 5. Status report on Settlement Agreement projects  FSC  UB Hatchery  Adult Trap  LB Power House  Channel Creek Spawning Beachers 6. Review FS NEPA process timeline for stabilization project 7. Evaluation Meeting 8. Define Next Steps-All ACTION ITEMS Elizabeth will write a letter to notify FERC of the measures taken, through consultation with the CRAG, to address direct effects to the Upper Baker Barge. This letter will also propose that any cumulative effects of this action on the Historic District be addressed through ongoing consultation with the SHPO and the CRAG through the process outlined in the HPMP. Elizabeth will ask Henry Kunowski of HRA to help with the design and be involved in the process to see to CRAG concerns. Elizabeth will contact Gene Galloway in Feb-March to get information about drawdown. Outstanding Action Items:  Jan will explore what is involved with the NEPA process, including timeline, costs, and priority, with regard to stabilization of a specific site during drawdown.  Elizabeth will start a conversation with PSE and FERC regarding site stabilization during drawdown.  Jan will get the project initiation form to Elizabeth.  Elizabeth will draft a description of documentation for CRAG to review, for insertion into the Baker Master Plan, so that it is part of PSE’s process to consider with every project.  Elizabeth will collect data for a new table for those buildings that have not been evaluated, and include a DOE schedule.  Elizabeth will see if the Museum newspaper project can be added to the Master Plan. Welcome and Introductions—Elizabeth  Elizabeth introduced Paul Weatherbee, License Manager for the Baker Hydro Project. Elizabeth thanked Scott for hosting the meeting. 1. Review notes/agenda/action Items: Agenda  Item 6, “Review FS NEPA process timeline for stabilization project” is postponed until February. Action Items  Jan will explore what is involved with the NEPA process, including timeline, costs, and priority, with regard to stabilization of a specific site during drawdown. This will be addressed at the February meeting.  Elizabeth will start a conversation with PSE and FERC regarding site stabilization during drawdown. Elizabeth has talked with PSE about stabilization, but is waiting on the Treatment Plan and Forest Service input before initiation a conversation with FERC.  Chris will work on the Treatment Plan for the site identified for stabilization. A draft outline for the Treatment Plan is due before the end of the month and will be distributed to all for review.  Candace will find a facilitator for the March 19 meeting. Lyn Wiltse will facilitate the March 19 meeting when Candace is on vacation. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 16, 2008 Page 2 of 5  The Historical Structures report will be finalized within the week. HAER documents are included. The Structural Engineering Report has safety issues regarding the historic district that are being reviewed to see whether action will be necessary. The following action items will remain as Outstanding Action Items.  Jan will explore what is involved with the NEPA process, including timeline, costs, and priority, with regard to stabilization of a specific site during drawdown.  Elizabeth will start a conversation with PSE and FERC regarding site stabilization during drawdown. 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? Resource Group decision-making process overview  Paul Weatherbee reported that PSE settled out of court with the Diking Districts and Cities involved in the appeal, with PSE giving funds and a venue for approaching the BRICC about changes to the Settlement Agreement. PSE’s position is neutral, and PSE will abide by any decision reached by the parties to the Agreement. The 60 day period to receive feedback is almost over and so far there is no indication of a request for change. Flood control will still come up. Article 107 of the Settlement Agreement allows for changes in response to the Corps General Investigation without having to amend the Settlement Agreement.  The NOAA BiOp is the only remaining obstacle to obtaining the license, and it is expected that we will receive the license the 2nd Quarter of 2008.  Other topics covered in the November meeting were general project update and the Terrestrial Resource Plan with regard to an elk habitat.  The January BRICC meeting will be focused on license implementation of Article 601, which is a simple mechanism for decision-making, and providing for input from the BRICC and Resource Groups. PSE will propose tools and receive input. The BRICC decision-making model will be shared at the February CRAG meeting so that CRAG can implement it as well and move forward.  The January BRICC meeting will also cover the 2008 Capital Plan, O&M, plan development. 3. UB Barge (―Gulper‖) and pass-through pipeline PSE proposed plan  The Floating Surface Collector (FSC) is in place to fulfill the Settlement Agreement. HAEBS/HAER was accepted by SHPO, and re-use and salvage of the barge have been investigated. The louver system is being retained for potential I&E use. Other options, such as using the barge as an island for migratory birds, have been ruled out. Tacoma Power is interested in the trap, but not the barge. The Settlement Agreement calls for new construction, and no use has been found for the barge, though we can still look for I&E and landscaping opportunities for pieces. Elizabeth is checking into whether it is possible for PSE to make a cultural donation with funds received from salvaged materials. ACTION: Elizabeth will write a letter to notify FERC of the measures taken, through consultation with the CRAG, to address direct effects to the Upper Baker Barge. This letter will also propose that any cumulative effects of this action on the Historic District be addressed through ongoing consultation with the SHPO and the CRAG Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 16, 2008 Page 3 of 5 through the process outlined in the HPMP. Elizabeth will cc: CRAG members. Scott offered to write a letter of support to FERC. 4. Status report on Settlement Agreement projects FSC  The FSC is in place, coming up to ballasting/balancing. There is video and photographic documentation. They have worked on the mooring system and setting the controls the last 2-3 weeks. The nets are set. It is on schedule to be ready by early March as per the Settlement Agreement, and punch list items will be finished later in the summer. UB Hatchery  The hatchery is at 30% design. Elizabeth is preparing a report to reflect there are no expected effects. Work is being done on a permitting schedule with a view to finish the hatchery this year. Adult Trap  The adult trap is at 90% design. It might be larger to allow for I&E. There could be aesthetic improvements. ACTION: It was agreed to ask Henry Kunowski of HRA to help with the design and be involved in the process to see to CRAG concerns. The February CRAG meeting will include a report on the Adult Trap and an opportunity for input. Henry will be invited to attend the meeting.  Elizabeth is working with a team on staging areas and pipeline disturbance. They are going to a three foot depth approximately ten feet below the railroad trestle area. She will review the geo technical reports. LB Power House  Potential locations are being reviewed; in and around the current location is most likely. Surveys have been done. Geo technical work has been done to study slump/slide and to do testing. Monitoring is ongoing. There are concerns about the previous slide and there is a potential to uncover it under Article 106 provisions. There is a six-year timeline connected to the license issuance, and options are being costed out. Should we do more inventory? Is there value at the old power house location? Elizabeth is researching. There is some question of what may be underneath. Locating all the old records could be mitigation. Channel Creek Spawning Beaches  The present agreement with the Forest Service on the Channel Creek spawning beaches is to decommission them and return them to a more natural state. Beaches #1 and #2 are historic. There are asbestos and other contaminants. We will need to do HAEBS/HAER and decide on mitigation. An undocumented old waterworks and foundation have been located. These need to be researched before removal. The beaches are eligible for the Register as part of the historic district. There has been some discussion with Jan about preserving in place, but safety issues are involved. There would need to be a gate or other protection. We need to explore options for I&E. The area is not easily accessible, primarily by hiking. 6. Review FS NEPA process timeline for stabilization project – postponed to February meeting. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 16, 2008 Page 4 of 5 Other Topics  A master plan of projects would be helpful for the CRAG annual meeting. This is being addressed at the January BRICC meeting and will be reported at the February CRAG meeting. Evaluate Meeting Good lunch Awesome facilities Less travel time for most of us Needs improvement Short on attendance Define Next Steps February 20 meeting:  Decision-making, Article 601 implementation  Fisheries presentation of the Adult Trap  Henry Kunowski’s input on the Adult Trap design Other:  There is a possibility a teamlet meeting will be needed to work on the Treatment Plan.  Bob drew attention to the possibility of a larger drawdown this spring which might expose areas that have not yet been assessed. Elizabeth is meeting with NWAA to define their scope for monitoring this year and could include monitoring this situation. ACTION: Elizabeth will contact Gene Galloway in Feb-March to get information about drawdown. There was brief discussion about possible people who could be on call to respond and do assessment at the appropriate time if the opportunity arises. Scott indicated that there are trained people in the Tribe who could be available. Next Meeting Wednesday, February 20, 2008 Location TBA Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 16, 2008 Page 5 of 5  