 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting May 1st, 2008 (9:00 p.m. – 2:00 p.m.) WDFW Mill Creek Office 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard Mill Creek, Washington 98012-1296 Telephone (425) 775-1311 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 2821, Password: 4567 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 ©) if you plan to call into meeting AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from March 6th, 2008 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? 3. Decisions Required at Today’s meeting (Detailed Information Attached (if needed)): None 1. Decision Item #1 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent) 2. Decision Item #2 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent)  Please Designate Proxy to express your view if you can not attend. 4. General Updates  Loon platforms and surveys - Anna  Carex flava, others? – Anna and ? 5. Elk Update  Easements/Acquisition update - Ira  Alternate properties list / status – Ira, Ray, Tony  Pre-acquisition survey reports – Marty/Kathy  Property acquisition process - Tony 6. TRMP Update  New Format of plans - Marty  Next steps? 7. Other?  Land Acquisition Process development  Property Priority Process Teamlet 8. Evaluate meeting, set location (WDFW Mill Creek) and agenda for next meeting (June 5th, 2008) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes May 1, 2008 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Anna Kopitov, Cary Feldmann, Ira McDaniel and Jacob Venard (PSE); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Dave Geroux (WDFW); Ray Croswell and Bob Nelson (RMEF); Don Gay (USFS); Chris Danilson (Sauk- Suiattle); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA Consulting). NEXT MEETINGS: Acquisition Process Teamlet: May 9, 2008; TRIG: June 5, 2008 Future TRIG Meetings: First Thursdays through 2008. ACTION ITEMS  All - If interested in site visit to June’s discussion property, call Tony to coordinate  Ira - Send Dave a copy of the map and parcel numbers to facilitate WDFW review  Dave - Explore WDFW’s input on the poss. trade / development-prevention property  Dave - Check to see if the high-damage area map is available to share electronically  Dave - Let Ira know if the Elk Core area follows any legal boundaries (rivers, etc.)  Dave - Invite Cpt. Hebner to next TRIG meeting  Lou Ellyn – Send out directions for Friday’s acquisition process teamlet meeting  Kathy/Anna – Coordinate add’l site visit (plant survey) to June’s discussion property  Tony - Give Kathleen electronic copies of all TRIG notes for posting on the web PREVIOUS – STILL RELEVANT – ACTION ITEMS  Ira/Cary - Meet with Tribes to more clearly understand their interests relative to easements.  Paul - Connect with Greta re: USFS / PSE financial process upon license issuance  Paul - Add footnote to decision flow chart (written explanation of “no,” see below).  Paul - Follow up to ensure meeting minutes are available online or via a CD.  Marty - In 2008, work with Tony/Paul on a pre-acquisition checklist for PSE to document compliance with S.A./License … share w/ TRIG (info only) when complete.  Tony/Paul – Draft a proposal for TRMP language re: financial processes (budget, audit, etc). Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 1 of 4 UPDATE ON PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS Dave shared that WDFW was not comfortable with borrowing from elk funds for the parcel discussed at the last meeting because the property in question had not yet been reviewed by the ARG. Ira therefore let the landowner know that we’d be unable to make any commitments within their preferred timeline, so they could market their site to others. It was noted that the ARG will be discussing Article 505 at their next meeting, and Stan suggested that PSE put together a site visit for TRIG / ARG members that want to see the property. Dave shared that he did not forward a shape file of the elk core area to Ira because there isn’t an electronic shape file of the boundaries available. Without such a file, Ira and Joetta hand drew a rough outline of the core area onto their maps, but it is not exact. Dave will check to see if the core area follows specific legal descriptions (rivers, ridges, highways, etc) that would make Ira’s drawing and Joetta’s GIS map more precise. Cary shared that PSE is making progress on updating the website. Tony will provide Kathleen with all TRIG notes for posting. The site may be current by our next meeting; PSE will report. BRICC / LICENSE UPDATES Cary reported that the BRICC Mtg. has been deferred to June 10 to coordinate with the ARG meeting and FSC tour at Baker. FERC is still waiting for the NMFS Bi-Op … and we’ve heard that NMFS could conclude their internal review “any day.” We are estimating that it will then take FERC a couple months for turn-around. Good news: Diking District 17 has taken action with their board to withdraw their concern. For fun, we added a few new members to our friendly wager about license issuance. Last summer, folks guessed the following dates: Marty 9/27, Don 10/12, Anna 10/31, Cary 11/1, Brock 11/21, Tony 12/20, Sally 1/5, Kathy 1/24, Jamie 2/14, Bob 4/1, and Patrick 4/20. Winner earns bragging rights and a piece of PSE attire. We decided that these old dates would stand (no year attached), and added the following: Lou Ellyn 11/30, Jacob 10/11, and Ira 8/15. ELK LAND ACQUISITION: Ira and Ray are formalizing their process for working together toward land acquisition. Ray’s primary role is in assisting identification of properties and making initial contacts with landowners, and Ira will coordinate with Ray on contacts, and conduct due diligence, escrow, etc. Ira and Tony shared information about some specific properties. Ira will send Dave an electronic copy of the area map and parcel numbers so he can talk with Mike about WDFW’s input on the possible trade / development-prevention property. Dave will reply to the group next week. Ray will connect with the possible trade partner to explore those possibilities. The group approved moving forward with a pre-acquisition survey if WDFW’s input is positive. Marty distributed a pre-acquisition survey report on a property that was discussed at the last meeting. This property could come forward for a formal “to buy or not to buy” decision in June, so Cary asked folks to share if they have any questions or need additional information in order to make that decision. Ira is going to conduct some additional research (value, etc.) and bring that to the next meeting. Kathy will also review the weed management decision process and Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 2 of 4 estimated treatment costs. Kathy and Anna will coordinate an additional site visit (including the adjacent parcel) to evaluate this. TRIGgers have a verbal right of entry to go view the land. Call Tony to coordinate. Tony is concurrently running this property through internal PSE reviews. June’s decision would be to give PSE approval and parameters to enter into negotiations with the landowner. Please ask any questions you need and come prepared to discuss/decide. INFLUENCE / VOTING RE: LAND ACQUISITION Stan shared information about a 4/15/08 meeting between the Tribes and WDFW re: land acquisition and WDFW’s influence. The Tribes requested additional clarity about damage area criteria, perhaps including a formal presentation and discussion at the BRICC. Cary reviewed the decision making process, including the possibility of elevating an issue to the BRCC; he noted that this article is one of the few which receive special treatment and qualify for “majority rule” decision if needed (no one has veto power). Several members of the group emphasized the risk associated with such action, mainly the possible damage to our strong working relationships and highlighted the value of finding consensus by maintaining our collaborative approach. (“How can we help solve each other’s problems?”) Marty suggested it might be helpful to review core values / interests-based problem solving as a refresher from our early Settlement Agreement process training. It would be helpful to understand WDFW’s legislative mandates, both in terms of damage liability and elk herd safety. Dave offered to invite Cpt. Hebner to our next meeting to discuss:  Legislative mandates and liability issues  Herd and people safety  High damage areas  “Absolute No” areas Stan encouraged folks to read the email overview (sent 4/28/08) of the Tribe / WDFW meeting and discussion points … and to share your thoughts on the issues. LAND ACQUISITION PROCESS TEAMLET Friday, May 9, 2008, 9-11 am at Lou Ellyn’s office in Olympia Tony, Anna, Dave, Lou Ellyn, Bob, Chris, Ira, Haley, Cary are members of this teamlet LOON TEAMLET Anna shared that PSE conducted two surveys in April. The loons are back at the lake, but there was no evidence of loon activity on the platform. There was scat on the ramp, but that’s probably from Canada geese. Anna anticipates additional maintenance needs on the exclusionary materials (ropes, buoys) and platform this year. Folks discussed the late spring and its possible effects on loon clutch timing. BOTANICAL TEAMLET The Carex flava survey has been postponed due to the delay in license issuance. Kathy shared information about the latest USFS sensitive species list and noted that some species, including Carex flava, have been dropped from the list. The effect of this is that we may not need to write Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 3 of 4  