 BAKER RIVER PROJECT LICENSE IMPLEMENTATION Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting June 4th, 2009 (9:00 p.m. – 2:00 p.m.) WDFW Mill Creek Office 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard Mill Creek, Washington 98012-1296 Telephone (425) 775-1311 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 2821, Password: 4567 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 (m)) if you plan to call into meeting AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from May 7th, 2009 meeting. 2. Review recent BRCC meeting activities and New License review/issues.  License/BRCC update  Review TRIG Norms - Tony  TRIG budget – Kim and Tony 3. Decisions Required at Today’s Meeting: Yes 1. Decision Item #1: Does the TRIG formally adopt certain decisions made in previous interim meetings, specifically those discussed at today’s meeting? (Agree to list prior to decision) 2. Decision Item #2: Should PSE proceed (based on price limits, schedule, and terms of negotiation set by TRIG) to negotiate and make an offer to acquire property Y as previously identified by the TRIG to satisfy part of the land acquisition for Article 503 (Elk Habitat)?  Please Designate Proxy to express your view if you cannot attend. 4. Land Acquisition Update  Property Y Update, Alternate properties list – Ira and Tony  Report on “new” alternative property - Ira  Discussion regarding the assets and liabilities on acquired lands – Cary and Marty 5. TRMP plans update  Review updated TRMP implementation schedule - Marty  Potential for request for filing extensions – Cary  Updates on plans (BE management plans, other TRMP plans) – Haley, Tony, Kathy, Mel, Marty 6. Loon/Osprey Implementation Update  Progress - Haley 7. Aquatic Riparian Habitat Working Group (Article 505)  Meeting update, status of Plan - Tony 8. Evaluate meeting, set location (WDFW Mill Creek) and agenda for next meeting (July 2nd, 2009) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Meeting Notes June 4, 2009 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, and Ira McDaniel (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Don Gay (USFS); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); Bob Nelson and Bill Richardson (RMEF); David Geroux (WDFW); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA). DECISIONS  None today. The proposed decision re: “Property Y” was deferred pending additional research (which the TRIG authorized PSE to conduct, see below). The proposed decision re: the pre-license decision list was deferred pending agreement about the assets and liabilities on acquired lands. NEXT MEETING: July 2, and hold 1st Thurs for monthly or every other month meetings (workload dependent) ACTION ITEMS  All If you would like to help ID trees for Osprey nests, contact Haley (site visit week of June 9)  Tony Resend the multi-article draft language out with these notes  Tony Look into setting up your laptop for WebX and work w/ tech re: TRIG FTP site  Ira Research “Property Y” road maintenance costs (what involved, how much, who’s responsible) and onsite timber (merchantable and pre-merch acreage, ‘harvestability’ relative to soil stability)  Jamie Insert TRMP timeline and loon photos into notes PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS  Kim Email BRCC funding handout (from April BRCC meeting) to TRIG  Kim Work on simplified budget report sheet, provide to TRIG when available  All Review the draft language re: multi-article properties, send comments to Tony  Marty Update pre-acquisition checklist to include estimated land ownership costs  Tony Add language to memorialize “good faith effort” to the decision list BRCC / LICENSING AND PROCESS UPDATE The BRCC hasn’t met since the last TRIG meeting; the next BRCC meeting is scheduled for June 24. Multi-Article Properties Update: Tony will re-send the draft language that was developed back in January. There was consensus agreement to continue to assess parcels on a case-by-case basis to identify opportunities to best fulfill the intent of the Settlement Agreement / License. This issue may need BRCC review since it involves more than just one resource group. Norms: The TRIG agreed to change its norms around the distribution of draft notes. The previous norm has been to distribute the draft notes only to those who attended the meeting and then distribute the final notes to the full TRIG. In order to facilitate a more ‘real time’ dialogue with those who miss meetings, the group agreed that Tony Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Meeting Notes June 4, 2009 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, and Ira McDaniel (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Don Gay (USFS); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); Bob Nelson and Bill Richardson (RMEF); David Geroux (WDFW); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA). DECISIONS  None today. The proposed decision re: “Property Y” was deferred pending additional research (which the TRIG authorized PSE to conduct, see below). The proposed decision re: the pre-license decision list was deferred pending agreement about the assets and liabilities on acquired lands. NEXT MEETING: July 2, and hold 1st Thurs for monthly or every other month meetings (workload dependent) ACTION ITEMS  All If you would like to help ID trees for Osprey nests, contact Haley (site visit week of June 9)  Tony Resend the multi-article draft language out with these notes  Tony Look into setting up your laptop for WebX and work w/ tech re: TRIG FTP site  Ira Research “Property Y” road maintenance costs (what involved, how much, who’s responsible) and onsite timber (merchantable and pre-merch acreage, ‘harvestability’ relative to soil stability)  Jamie Insert TRMP timeline and loon photos into notes PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS  Kim Email BRCC funding handout (from April BRCC meeting) to TRIG  Kim Work on simplified budget report sheet, provide to TRIG when available  All Review the draft language re: multi-article properties, send comments to Tony  Marty Update pre-acquisition checklist to include estimated land ownership costs  Tony Add language to memorialize “good faith effort” to the decision list BRCC / LICENSING AND PROCESS UPDATE The BRCC hasn’t met since the last TRIG meeting; the next BRCC meeting is scheduled for June 24. Multi-Article Properties Update: Tony will re-send the draft language that was developed back in January. There was consensus agreement to continue to assess parcels on a case-by-case basis to identify opportunities to best fulfill the intent of the Settlement Agreement / License. This issue may need BRCC review since it involves more than just one resource group. Norms: The TRIG agreed to change its norms around the distribution of draft notes. The previous norm has been to distribute the draft notes only to those who attended the meeting and then distribute the final notes to the full TRIG. In order to facilitate a more ‘real time’ dialogue with those who miss meetings, the group agreed that Tony will distribute draft notes to the full TRIG. Tony will also look into getting his laptop set up to provide WebX and will work with PSE’s tech folks re: TRIG FTP site. LAND ACQUISITION: Ira (PSE) walked the group through the appraisal and approximate timber values associated with “Property Y.” This parcel includes some currently merchantable timber and some other timber that is “pre-merchantable.” As the team talked about the anticipated / potential assets and liabilities associated with this parcel, Bill (RMEF) noted that it generally costs $1,000 to $1,200 to convert an acre of pre-merchantable timber into pasture land. PSE suggested a way to approach the issue of assets and liabilities related to this parcel: Identify the standing timber that would be included in an initial harvest to improve the forage habitat for elk; develop a plan and timeline for this harvest and invest (reimburse?) the net proceeds of that harvest into the elk land acquisition (capital) fund. Then, net proceeds from any future harvests – which would be conducted within the land management plan to increase elk forage value – would supplement the elk land O&M fund. This suggestion to treat the “initial harvest” differently from future harvests is intended to address the concern of increased land value / cost that is due to the value of currently existing timber. There was agreement around the idea of creating a harvest plan (for existing timber) that is consistent with the overall management of the land for elk forage. As the group talked about assets and liabilities on acquired lands in more general terms, there was also reiterated consensus agreement that there is a shared interest in ensuring that land acquired to meet the terms of the Settlement Agreement / License is managed to maximize benefit for the habitat or species in the associated article. Don volunteered to draft a “straw dog” proposal re: assets / liabilities and associated timeframes for the TRIG to consider at the next meeting. Specifically re: “Property Y,” the TRIG requested and authorized PSE to conduct the following research:  Road maintenance requirements, including RMAP (what’s involved, estimated costs, who pays)  Contact DNR re future planned use / access on nearby parcels  Identify the acreage / location of merchantable and pre-merchantable timber, and work with a Forester to determine whether it is harvestable based on soil / slope issues  Are there other known / anticipated liabilities associated with this property? (Note: pre-acquisition survey did not find any major weed issues.) “New Alternate” and review of other possible parcels: Due to a family illness, Ira and Ray (RMEF) were unable to conduct site visits, so this update was postponed to next month. TRMP UPDATE AND SCHEDULE Marty walked the group through an updated schedule of TRMP review/comment and filing deadlines. Note: Plans that are in the “official review” period must go out certified mail for documentation purposes. Tony reminded folks that the certified mail copy goes to the person in each agency / organization that is listed as the “lead.” Tony will email a digital version of each document to team members to make commenting easier. Target dates for PSE to send out management plans for 30-day reviews (except SA 511, which is 90 days):  SA 501 - Final draft send August 1st (certified mail and e-mail)  SA 502 - 1st draft send June 12th (e-mail)  SA 503 - 1st draft send June 15th (e-mail)  SA 504 - 1st draft send June 26th (e-mail)  SA 506 - 1st draft send June 17th (e-mail)  SA 507 - 1st draft send June 15th (e-mail)  SA 508 - 1st draft send June 19th (e-mail)  SA 511 - Final draft send June 12th (certified mail and e-mail, requires 90-day review)  SA 512/513 - 1st draft send June 15th (e-mail)  SA 514 - 1st draft send June 26th (e-mail).  Then, the final drafts of all plans other than SA 501 and SA 511 will be sent certified mail (and e-mailed) on the week of August 10th for their formal review periods. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 6/4/09 Notes, Page 2 of 3 LOON / OSPREY NESTING PLATFORM UPDATE Osprey: Haley reported that she, Mel, and Dave are going onsite next week (week of June 9) to choose specific trees to modify for Osprey nests. There aren’t a lot of trees within the project boundary that are currently big enough to serve this purpose, so – in addition to topping a few trees that are of sufficient size – nest-site creation will include thinning around some “almost ready” trees to encourage their growth to a size that will be sufficient for our purposes. She shared that there have been three surveys on Lake Shannon and one on Baker Lake; and they’ve found three active Osprey nests so far. Eagles have also been observed in the area, not directly on their own nests, but near their nests. Loons: Kathy and Haley collected local plants for the loons’ floating nest platforms on May 11. The Lake Shannon platform was re-installed in March and the two new platforms were installed on Baker May 13-14 (see “Baker Loon Nest Platform Installation” document, distributed w/ these notes). These new platforms sit much lower in the water and are designed to be left in place year-round. Signage was installed at boat launches May 21 and four no-wake buoys were installed around each nesting platform May 28. No loons have been sighted yet on / near the platforms, but a pair of loons was seen across the lake on the 28th. LEGACY WOOD UPDATE Don, Marty, and Haley met yesterday to talk about Don’s input on the Article 511 Legacy Wood plan. They distributed a one-page overview of the proposed changes, which the TRIG reviewed. The proposed changes will be reflected in the next draft of the 511 plan. ARHWG (ARTICLE 505) UPDATE The Aquatic Riparian Habitat Working Group, which is a joint group comprised of ARG and TRIG members, has begun meeting to work on the Article 505 plan. They have created draft norms and criteria. Tony forwarded ARHWG’s notes and attachments to the TRIG with last month’s notes. One issue they have brought forward is a reminder that the ARHWG is a working group, not a decision-making body. Proposals will be brought to the ARG and TRIG for final decisions / approval. July 2, 2009 Agenda:  Land Acquisition Update, o Property Y (research update, assets / liabilities, possible decision) o "new alternate" property and other options  TRMP & Other Plans o Plan Review Schedule o Potential extension requests  Decisions list - review draft language  Budget Report  Loon / Osprey Report Handouts:  5/7/09 Notes & 6/4/09 Agenda  6/4/09 Overview of proposed changes to Article 511 plan MEETING EVALUATION What worked well:  Got out early  Good, honest discussion on difficult topic  Patrick photo and NCCC info Do differently:  Going to miss Dave (have enjoyed working together)  Rotten traffic BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 6/4/09 Notes, Page 3 of 3 will distribute draft notes to the full TRIG. Tony will also look into getting his laptop set up to provide WebX and will work with PSE’s tech folks re: TRIG FTP site. LAND ACQUISITION: Ira (PSE) walked the group through the appraisal and approximate timber values associated with “Property Y.” This parcel includes some currently merchantable timber and some other timber that is “pre-merchantable.” As the team talked about the anticipated / potential assets and liabilities associated with this parcel, Bill (RMEF) noted that it generally costs $1,000 to $1,200 to convert an acre of pre-merchantable timber into pasture land. PSE suggested a way to approach the issue of assets and liabilities related to this parcel: Identify the standing timber that would be included in an initial harvest to improve the forage habitat for elk; develop a plan and timeline for this harvest and invest (reimburse?) the net proceeds of that harvest into the elk land acquisition (capital) fund. Then, net proceeds from any future harvests – which would be conducted within the land management plan to increase elk forage value – would supplement the elk land O&M fund. This suggestion to treat the “initial harvest” differently from future harvests is intended to address the concern of increased land value / cost that is due to the value of currently existing timber. There was agreement around the idea of creating a harvest plan (for existing timber) that is consistent with the overall management of the land for elk forage. As the group talked about assets and liabilities on acquired lands in more general terms, there was also reiterated consensus agreement that there is a shared interest in ensuring that land acquired to meet the terms of the Settlement Agreement / License is managed to maximize benefit for the habitat or species in the associated article. Don volunteered to draft a “straw dog” proposal re: assets / liabilities and associated timeframes for the TRIG to consider at the next meeting. Specifically re: “Property Y,” the TRIG requested and authorized PSE to conduct the following research:  Road maintenance requirements, including RMAP (what’s involved, estimated costs, who pays)  Contact DNR re future planned use / access on nearby parcels  Identify the acreage / location of merchantable and pre-merchantable timber, and work with a Forester to determine whether it is harvestable based on soil / slope issues  Are there other known / anticipated liabilities associated with this property? (Note: pre-acquisition survey did not find any major weed issues.) “New Alternate” and review of other possible parcels: Due to a family illness, Ira and Ray (RMEF) were unable to conduct site visits, so this update was postponed to next month. TRMP UPDATE AND SCHEDULE Marty walked the group through an updated schedule of TRMP review/comment and filing deadlines. Note: Plans that are in the “official review” period must go out certified mail for documentation purposes. Tony reminded folks that the certified mail copy goes to the person in each agency / organization that is listed as the “lead.” Tony will email a digital version of each document to team members to make commenting easier. Target dates for PSE to send out management plans for 30-day reviews (except SA 511, which is 90 days):  SA 501 - Final draft send August 1st (certified mail and e-mail)  SA 502 - 1st draft send June 12th (e-mail)  SA 503 - 1st draft send June 15th (e-mail)  SA 504 - 1st draft send June 26th (e-mail)  SA 506 - 1st draft send June 17th (e-mail)  SA 507 - 1st draft send June 15th (e-mail)  SA 508 - 1st draft send June 19th (e-mail)  SA 511 - Final draft send June 12th (certified mail and e-mail, requires 90-day review)  SA 512/513 - 1st draft send June 15th (e-mail)  SA 514 - 1st draft send June 26th (e-mail).  Then, the final drafts of all plans other than SA 501 and SA 511 will be sent certified mail (and e-mailed) on the week of August 10th for their formal review periods. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 6/4/09 Notes, Page 2 of 3 LOON / OSPREY NESTING PLATFORM UPDATE Osprey: Haley reported that she, Mel, and Dave are going onsite next week (week of June 9) to choose specific trees to modify for Osprey nests. There aren’t a lot of trees within the project boundary that are currently big enough to serve this purpose, so – in addition to topping a few trees that are of sufficient size – nest-site creation will include thinning around some “almost ready” trees to encourage their growth to a size that will be sufficient for our purposes. She shared that there have been three surveys on Lake Shannon and one on Baker Lake; and they’ve found three active Osprey nests so far. Eagles have also been observed in the area, not directly on their own nests, but near their nests. Loons: Kathy and Haley collected local plants for the loons’ floating nest platforms on May 11. The Lake Shannon platform was re-installed in March and the two new platforms were installed on Baker May 13-14 (see “Baker Loon Nest Platform Installation” document, distributed w/ these notes). These new platforms sit much lower in the water and are designed to be left in place year-round. Signage was installed at boat launches May 21 and four no-wake buoys were installed around each nesting platform May 28. No loons have been sighted yet on / near the platforms, but a pair of loons was seen across the lake on the 28th. LEGACY WOOD UPDATE Don, Marty, and Haley met yesterday to talk about Don’s input on the Article 511 Legacy Wood plan. They distributed a one-page overview of the proposed changes, which the TRIG reviewed. The proposed changes will be reflected in the next draft of the 511 plan. ARHWG (ARTICLE 505) UPDATE The Aquatic Riparian Habitat Working Group, which is a joint group comprised of ARG and TRIG members, has begun meeting to work on the Article 505 plan. They have created draft norms and criteria. Tony forwarded ARHWG’s notes and attachments to the TRIG with last month’s notes. One issue they have brought forward is a reminder that the ARHWG is a working group, not a decision-making body. Proposals will be brought to the ARG and TRIG for final decisions / approval. July 2, 2009 Agenda:  Land Acquisition Update, o Property Y (research update, assets / liabilities, possible decision) o "new alternate" property and other options  TRMP & Other Plans o Plan Review Schedule o Potential extension requests  Decisions list - review draft language  Budget Report  Loon / Osprey Report Handouts:  5/7/09 Notes & 6/4/09 Agenda  6/4/09 Overview of proposed changes to Article 511 plan MEETING EVALUATION What worked well:  Got out early  Good, honest discussion on difficult topic  Patrick photo and NCCC info Do differently:  Going to miss Dave (have enjoyed working together)  Rotten traffic BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 6/4/09 Notes, Page 3 of 3  