Final RRG Meeting Notes August 17, 2010 / 9:30 a.m. <ad> 2:30 p.m. / Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA 98233  Baker River Project License Implementation  Recreation Resource Group Meting Final Meeting Notes August 17, 2010 9:30 pm <ad> 2:30 pm  Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change)  PRESENT Pam Garland, Haley Edwards, Scott Heller, Linda Kupfer and Elizabeth Dubreuil by phone, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Ann Dunphy (USFS); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Jamie Van DeVanter (Van de Vanter Group), Sergio Capozzi by phone (AECOM), Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC), and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting)  2010 RRG MEETING DATES Oct. 19, Dec. 21 from 9:30 <ad> 2:30. We will provide Web-Ex capability for these meetings to facilitate remote attendance.  NEW ACTION ITEMS All Let Pam know of any updates to the contact list for your organization. All Let Pam/ Sergio know of any additional feedback on current version (discussed at this meeting) of the Water Safety Tear Sheets by August 24. All Get Jamie your feedback on the Aesthetics Management Plan ASAP. Pam Check on status of PSE website. Pam Meet with Ann re swimming delineation for water safety tear sheet maps. Sergio Make changes according to our discussions and send out new version of water safety tear sheet map for all to review. Brock Let Pam know about WDFW recommended buffer around loon platform. Pam Send out updated draft of front and back of draft tear sheet map for Water Safety by September 17. All Review tear map alternatives (see above) and send comments on messaging and maps to Pam by October 1. Sergio Send out next version of Water Safety tear sheet to all by October 12 (for discussion at October 19 RRG meeting). Pam Set up Bulletin Board teamlet and be prepared to report on progress at October 19 meeting.  ONGOING ACTION ITEMS Pam Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration (e.g., I&E) <ad> ongoing.  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes August 17, 2010  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 6   APPROVAL OF MEETING NOTES We reviewed and approved the draft June 15 RRG meeting notes without edits. They will be marked as final and posted to the PSE website.  BRCC UPDATE The BRCC did not meet last month. Cary emailed out an overview of activities in the various resource groups. Cary will continue to do this for the months where the BRCC does not meet. The next BRCC meeting is scheduled for October 27 at a location to be determined. We will continue checking with folks at each of the resource groups and the BRCC to see if a license or settlement walk-through this fall is warranted. The aim of this would be to bring new members up to speed on the content of the license and to review its terms and conducts for existing members who want a refresher.  UPDATE ON BAKER LAKE CONSTRUCTION Ann reported that Construction Unlimited is the contractor they hired for the Baker Lake Resort (now called Swift Creek Campground). They are about a month into the construction. They have completed all demolition around the well site. They are more than 50% on the construction of the new generator well house building. They have installed water, electrical and power line. They are also performing re-grading on the road. All road locations are now roughed in. They are working on trails this week. They are laying out the round-about on the end near the swim beach area. The distances are really tight because they don't want to have to remove many trees. Some tree removal (42) was performed last fall.  The Forest Service has purchased some native plants form the conservation greenhouse this spring. They will be using them for re-vegetation. They have a rough planting plan and are currently growing some in holding beds at the FS compound at Baker River. The initial $50K of RAM funding was added to the contract. The FS is in the process of putting together the next proposal. It will likely include lighting and picnic shelters. Campsites will be hardened and rocked within the next month.  Construction is proceeding on schedule. The infrastructure should be complete by end of the year and the campground is planned to be open to visitors by next spring.  RECREATION PLAN / IMPLEMENTATION UPDATES Baker Reservoir Recreation Water Safety Plan (SA 304) Sergio reported that after the last meeting they distributed three different draft templates for the water safety maps. They didn't receive much feedback other than internally at PSE. In the interim they have come up with a new version that contains additional information. They are making an effort to maintain consistency in signage throughout the project. They are also trying to keep the front side easy to read and more graphically oriented with more text on the back side of the sheet. Sergio asked for feedback on the content of the sheets. The consensus was that there was too much text on the pack page and some of it was redundant. The sheet can be reformatted to 11 x 17 or any other size. It could be in a poster form or a tear sheet (or both). Legal size also works for tear sheet format. There was also a suggestion to change the headings on the back side to action statements.  Pam explained that they pulled safety information from the State and from USACE on boating. Other utilities have tear sheets we could use as reference as well. Snohomish PUD has some good examples.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 8/17/2010 Notes, Page 2 of 6   Ann will share safety information from the Whatcom County Sheriff's Office.  Suggestions for the front page: Make the map more prominent and include Anderson Point and Silver Creek (some of the popular disperse sites). Need to correct Bayview and Baker Lake Resort (renamed to "Swift Creek Campground"). Say something about sandbars and stumps (safety hazards). Need to be intentional about the messages. Are No wake and Life jackets the most important messages? Colors: Blue on blue background may be a poor choice. Consider also color blindness and how this would copy in black and white. Include messages related to respecting WDFW fish and game laws. Say something more specific about litter- locations of waste receptacles and bathrooms. Ensure safety is the prominent message <ad> include something about obstacles, fluctuating water levels, swimming areas, log boom around the FSC, etc. Include a picture of the lake at a lower level that calls attention to the hazards that exist <ad> showing some exposed stumps.  Suggestions for back page: Shift right column over to the left column. Add information from Haley related to loon protection. WDFW recommends a large buffer (no wake area) than 200 ft on the loon platform. Brock to research and let Pam know. There are Aquatic invasive species posters already on the bulletin boards so could address this more briefly on tear sheets. Need to be selective about the information we provide because space is at a premium (on tear sheets and also on bulletin boards. There is too much on PFDs in too many places. Checklist: Should you be operating a boat? Good to have boating safety information (one PFS for every person on the boat). Reference to fishing regulations (fishing license) <ad> add website link. Mention pack it in and pack it out <ad> leave no trace camping. Mention fireworks <ad> observe burning regulations. Include reference to enforcement agencies. Remove middle section and incorporate into Helping prevent collisions on the right hand side. Add USFS logo to tear sheet and also WDFW if get approval to do so.  Next Steps: Sergio will revise both sides of the draft tear sheet and Pam will send out to RRG members for comment and email any comments back to Sergio so he can integrate them into a semi-final draft for all to review prior to our October 20 meeting.  Draft Aesthetics Management Plan (SA 302) Jamie Van DeVanter has been working on a design for the screening of the fencing along FS 1106 and the discharge area by West Pass Dike at Upper Baker. Pam asked him to lay out the design for screening at Upper Baker using native plants as much as possible.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 8/17/2010 Notes, Page 3 of 6   Jamie explained the drawings he provided and described the vegetation he recommends for screening. The preference is to use native plants that don't require extra watering. We discussed clumping and retaining view breaks periodically to meet the screen objectives. There will still be a good view down by the boat launch. Next steps include getting Jamie feedback on these plans ASAP. Scott will likely lead the crew to do the actual implementation. Jamie will work with Scott to coordinate the plant list Pam will run the plan by PSE security and dam safety folks. 2009 Draft Annual Reports Pam reminded all that comments on reports for Articles 305 and 318 and due August 30 and comments for all the rest of the plans are due Sept 1, 2010. Cross Resource Issues Haley distributed a handout that summarized the terrestrial (avian) issues that intersect with recreation including License Article 410 on Threatened and Endangered Species. The handout included recommended vegetative buffers around lakes and streams, storm water run-off management, bull trout management, and the importance of maintaining up-to-date information at the Visitor Center. Update on Loon Platforms: Upcoming activities will include removing the Lake Shannon platform and replacing it with a different platform. They will also be realigning the buoys on Baker Lake. Haley noted that, unfortunately, one of the buoys for the Anderson Creek Platform was moved across the lake. We may need to add more weight to them to make it more difficult for people to move. People are getting too close and on the platforms. Some people seem to think they are diving platforms! We will work on improving signage to improve this situation. We need to let people know that these platforms are unstable for human use. We may also need to add some netting to discourage Canadian Geese. No loons have used the platform yet. Want to keep next tree dominant. We have approved Marbled Murlett assessments form WDFW for each site. Osprey Structures: They have selected 13 sites with trees to top for opsrey nest structures, including some structures, including some additional trees to maintain nest tree dominance. Decaying and legacy wood <ad> working on an implementation document to manage for this. Will mostly focus on acquired land. Haley announced they are conducting a second round of bald eagle night roost surveys this fall. No new nests found at aerial survey on July 19. One chick was observed at Lake Shannon. Elizabeth reported she has a project she is doing out at Horseshoe Cove. The CRAG just finalized the HPMP <ad> will send the final to FERC no later than Sept 30, 2010. All of the final engineered designs and project description info has been sent to Greta at the FS to distribute appropriately. They are planning on doing the work in late winter or early spring of 2011 to take advantage of lowest pool elevations. They will be doing cultural surveys there and also to support FSC construction. Ann let Elizabeth know that the FS is planning to do some work on the boat launch. She will coordinate this with Elizabeth. PSE is preparing to decommission the spawning beaches. They recently removed the ivy from the trees along the Baker spawning beaches. They transplanted sword fern (from project area) where they removed the ivy.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 8/17/2010 Notes, Page 4 of 6   Scott announced there will be Botanical Teamlet meeting on October 6, 210 to discuss plants of special status. There were no sightings this year. The draft mgt plan is currently undergoing internal PSE review.  Bulletin Board Teamlet The FS has constructed bulletin boards in the vicinity of the boat launches. We want to be intentional about the messages we put on these boards. Membership of this teamlet will include PSE team leads of the various resource groups, Ann Dunphy, Cary, Haley (who Elizabeth said can represent cultural as well as terrestrial interests). The FS will need to run the proposed design through their corporate team and law enforcement people. Pam will be sure to include PSE Dam Safety and Security. Should this be displayed at both reservoirs? The aim is to have this complete in time for the next recreation season. We will get an update at our next meeting Oct. 19. Pam will head up this teamlet. Haley will be her back-up.  Bear Safe Trash Containment Proposal Greta sent Pam a proposal for how the FS plans to manage trash at their campgrounds. She felt that PSE should send this to USFWS in response to the Biological Opinion. Haley included the FS proposal in the report on the Article 410 Grizzly Bear measure. Since this is an ESA-related topic this seems to be the appropriate place to put it. She has already received feedback from USFWS. Ann explained the FS educates and informs the hosts who are responsible for maintenance of the trash containers. They also moitor the trash levels and ensure there is no exposed and/or accessible trash even on peak weekends. Next steps <ad> Haley will send a courtesy copy of this report out as a courtesy to RRG members.  Swimming Delineation Pam reported that she asked a mechanical engineer from Baker put together a scope of work for the swimming delineation for Horseshoe Cove. They haven't done Swift Creek yet. Pam has gotten some quotes and some feedback from Worthington Products. They have ideas about what would be appropriate for that delineation. Tough booms are not a safe consideration due to the many pinch points. They recommend a buoy line in combination with adequate signage. This should be installed by the next recreation season. Information on these boat-free zones would be included on the tear sheets. Pam will follow up with PSE Risk and Claims Department to see about signage. Next steps: Pam will discuss this with Ann and address the new Swift Creek campground as well.  Lower Baker Floating Surface Collector (FSC) Construction In 2004 Jamie did some campground site drawings for the LB FSC site. PSE will provide a day use facility there- not a campground. Recently, Ed Schild has asked Pam to dust off those drawings and revise them a bit since the construction for the Lower Baker FSC is currently planned to take place at the boat launch. The PM is looking at some other areas that would be used as a temporary access boat launch as the construction needs to take place in the middle of the current boat launch area. This would be preferable to shutting down the boat launch area for Lake Shannon for a couple of years during construction. The interim access route being considered is along the blue gate that Cal Portland owns. The PSE prop line runs right along there (to the left as you enter).  OCTOBER 19 or 20 RRG MEETING TOPICS BRCC Update Decision on Forest Service request for RAM Funding (?) Cross Resource Issues Aesthetics Management Plan Update  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 8/17/2010 Notes, Page 5 of 6   Water Safety Plan Update Status of Annual Reports Bulletin Board Teamlet Report Terrestrial Update Other Updates? Set Dec Conference Call Agenda for RRG Evaluate Meeting and have lunch LEP meeting after lunch o Review of past season o 2011 funding o Next steps o Evaluate the meeting HANDOUTS June 15, 2010 notes from RRG Meetings (no edits) August 17, 2010 Agenda Draft Water Safety Team Sheet Resource Updates & Cross Resource Issues <ad> Terrestrial (Avian) MEETING EVALUATION Worked Well:  WebEx and conference call Got out early Good attendance Nice desk top and ring tone Do Differently: Start on time at 9am (vs. 9:30) Samish Conference room Carpool with Patrick Phone difficulties at start  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 8/17/2010 Notes, Page 6 of 6    2010-08-17_RRG_FinalNotes.pdf en 