Meeting Notes January 6, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call  Baker River Project License Implementation     Cultural Resource Advisory Group Final Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE), (425) 462-3609, elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com. PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Jan Hollenbeck (United States Forest Service), Ron Kent (USACE), Jessie Piper (Northwest Archeological Associates) and Candace Wilson (Facilitator, PDSA Consulting). Attending by Phone: Rob Whitlam (Department of Archaeology & Historic Preservation). DECISIONS: None today NEXT MEETING: Jan.20 (PSE Skagit Center, Burlington) 2010 MEETING DATES: January 27 (PSE Bellevue), February 17, March 17, April 21, May 19, June 16, July 21, August 18, September 15, October 20, November 17, December 15 JANUARY 6 AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from December 16, 2009 meeting. 2. Decisions today? No 3. HPMP Revision Update  Check-In on Review Process & Timeline  Discussion of Section 5  Revisit pg. 154: Actions under Maintenance Guidelines & Archaeological Treatment Plan  Revisit pg. 154: NFS Lands  Revisit Sections 5.3.2 and 5.3.3  Discussion of other issues  Further discussion of unresolved areas listed in Comments Log  Discussion of other issues  Next steps 4. Decisions for next meeting: None known 5. Evaluate meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting (January ___, 2010) ACTION ITEMS  Jan/Jessie Rework NFS section of the HPMP (pg. 154)  Jessie Send Tables 4.1 Proposed Actions and 4.2 Excluded License Articles to Jan  Elizabeth Rework Maintenance Guidelines section of the HPMP (pg. 154) to be more specific  Elizabeth Review NHPA for specifics on qualifications/determinations of Cultural resources Coordinator  All Determine placement of CRC/professional archaeologist proviso – should it be introduced at specific locations in the HPMP or included in the CRC qualifications in section 6? BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group  FINAL 1/6/10 Notes, Page 1 of 5    Meeting Notes January 6, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call   Jessie  Rework 5.3.5 Introduction and “Monitoring Program” to make it more inclusive of all cultural resources.  Elizabeth Investigate holding a 2010 CRAG meeting at Baker Lodge or Scott’s office.  Ron Provide CRAG a copy of the Corps Standard Operating Procedures Appendix D on emergencies  Elizabeth Research whether additional curation is needed for PSE engineered drawings  Elizabeth Send Section 5 of the HPMP to CRAG members PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS  Jan Provide agency letter stating more time needed for comments in the HPMP process  All: Review HPMP Section 1.5 on Confidentiality.  Elizabeth: Consult with Tribes and Forest Service regarding confidentiality.  All: Determine best action regarding potential issue with WISAARD access to confidential archaeological information.  Elizabeth: Follow up with Forest Service on Protective Options project. In process  Chris: Create structure of documents record. (This refers to a reference index of documents relating to CRAG indicating the date of the latest version.)  Chris: Contact the USACE Lawr Salo as a possible resource for this team. In process.  Kelly: Send Elizabeth some scenarios to use as examples in portraying decision and quorum rules for CRAG over the life of the license. On hold.  Kelly: Provide drawings of three treatment options for next meeting. This is still pending.  Elizabeth: Check to see if 2009 CRAG notes are posted on the website and send link to group. Ongoing.  Elizabeth: Look at curation protocols.  Elizabeth: Draft a description of documentation for CRAG to review, for insertion into the Baker Master Plan, so that it is part of PSE’s process to consider with every project.  Heather: Collect data for a new table for those buildings that have not been evaluated, and include a DOE schedule. (She handed this over to HRA).  Elizabeth: See if the Museum newspaper project can be added to the Master Plan.  All? Present findings from Treatment Plan collection at a professional conference. REVIEW NOTES/AGENDA/ACTION ITEMS: Notes Revised notes from the December 16 CRAG meeting were accepted as presented. Candace will send final notes to everyone. Agenda The agenda was reviewed. Jan asked for updates on 1106 and stabilization projects. Report on Action Items  Jan: Write new section for NFS lands in Section 5 HPMP. Pending.  Elizabeth: Write new sections for 5.3.2 and 5.3.3 separating out extra steps for NFS land. Done.  Ron: Prepare boiler plate language for permit application letter to help facilitate permitting process. Done. Ron has written a draft which is under review by USACE and PSE.  Jan Provide agency letter stating more time needed for comments in the HPMP process. Pending. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group  FINAL 1/6/10 Notes, Page 2 of 5    Meeting Notes January 6, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call  1106 Jan requested an update on the Road 1106 project. Jessie said the report on 1106 is projected for Jan. 8. STABILIZATION Elizabeth received an update from Kelly and will meet with PSE engineers January 19 per Roger’s request to see what might be done. The project will not happen this spring. It can possibly be done fall of this year, otherwise it will be scheduled for spring of 2011. Kim Lane is helping with contacts in the field. The project will probably require two pieces of equipment. HPMP REVISION UPDATE Revisit: NFS Lands – This was briefly discussed and will be revisited next meeting. ACTION: Jan/Jessie Rework NFS section of the HPMP (pg. 154) ACTION: Jessie: Send Tables 4.1 Proposed Actions and 4.2 Excluded License Articles to Jan Revisit: Actions under Maintenance Guidelines and Archaeological Treatment Plan – CRAG reviewed the new language, which Elizabeth took from the Maintenance Guidelines. Concerns were raised that the language is still not specific enough. Is the CRAG to be consulted? Rob would like Russell to review it, and Elizabeth needs to show it to Heather. ACTION: Elizabeth Rework Maintenance Guidelines section of the HPMP (pg. 154) to be more specific Sections 5.3.2 Unanticipated Discovery – Elizabeth reworked this section to consolidate the general process description and move all agency-specific processes to the end. There was discussion of the need to stipulate that if the Cultural Resources Coordinator is not a professional archaeologist one needs to be consulted. There was discussion about the qualifications of the Cultural Resources Coordinator and where to state them. ACTION: All Determine placement of CRC/professional archaeologist proviso – should it be introduced at specific locations in the HPMP or included in the CRC qualifications in section 6? ACTION: Elizabeth Review NHPA for specifics on qualifications/determinations of Cultural Resources Coordinator Jan asked if the old UDP is dead now. Jessie indicated it was placed in the HPMP. 5.3.3 Inadvertent Finds – This was reworked to consolidate general processes at the beginning and move agency specific processes to the end. Cultural items were added to human remains per Jan’s request. This section will be reviewed by Guy when it is completed. 5.3.4 Tribal Coordination – Jan asked about the possibility of other tribal interests coming up in the future. Elizabeth felt that is covered under Consultation. 5.3.5 Resource Protection/Monitoring– Jan asked if this repeats section 5.1.1. There was discussion of whether the term should be “archaeological resources” in the Introduction. Ron suggested making reference to this monitoring section in 5.1.1 ACTION: Jessie Rework 5.3.5 Intro and Monitoring Program to make inclusive of all resources. Form ARCRF – There was lengthy discussion about the ARCRF form – whether it is adequate in showing conditions, whether it shows changes over time. Ron would like to check with people in the field on this BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group  FINAL 1/6/10 Notes, Page 3 of 5    Meeting Notes January 6, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call  question. It is possible a general form may need to be customized for specific sites to get the data needed on significant conditions. Jan raised concerns about standardizing photopoints so that bank movement can be determined and so that monitoring can be done and reviewed by different people. Elizabeth is interested in doing a GIS format. There is a concern that the form is too complex for most sites. Mapping the reservoir might help. Archaeological Sites – There was discussion about language describing the area for annual visits. New requirements about low pool reservoir levels under the license may inhibit monitoring of some sites. Spring and fall are best, but last spring many sites were unavailable. Sedimentation can also affect access. Ron raised a question about “diagnostic” artifacts and that word was removed. Ron explained how higher reservoir levels can change vegetation and create effects. There was discussion of reporting processes associated with monitoring. There will be further discussion of reporting in the Annual Report section. Historic Structures – START HERE next time. ACTION: Elizabeth Send Section 5 of the HPMP to CRAG members ACTION: Elizabeth Research whether additional curation is needed for PSE engineered drawings Emergency – Elizabeth outlined PSE emergency plans. It was suggested to change the wording about notification to “as soon as practicable” vs “7 days.” ACTION: Ron Provide CRAG a copy of the Corps Standard Operating Procedures Appendix D on emergencies FUTURE MEETINGS The next meeting will be a regular meeting of the full CRAG at the PSE Skagit Center in Burlington. It was decided to schedule regular meetings at 10 a.m. this year. A meeting to continue discussion of Section 5 of the HPMP was set for January 27 at 9:30 at the PSE Bellevue office. Elizabeth will check on rooms. ACTION: Elizabeth Investigate holding a 2010 CRAG meeting at Baker Lodge or Scott’s office DECISIONS FOR NEXT MEETING: None known EVALUATE MEETING, SET LOCATION AND AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING (January 20, 2010) Evaluate Meeting:  Food/soup  Great discussion  Went slowly but smoothly  Good digressions  Candace’s patience Do Differently  More people BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group  FINAL 1/6/10 Notes, Page 4 of 5    Meeting Notes January 6, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call    Read through/come prepared  Draft Agenda for January 20, 2010 Meeting: 1. Review notes/agenda/action items for January 6, 2010 meeting 2. Review recent BRCC meeting activities, licensing updates?  BRCC membership contacts, timing of formalizing resource groups, meeting timing  Next steps 3. Decisions Required at Today’s Meeting: None Lunch 4. Project Updates  Next steps 5. HPMP Revision  Check-In on Review Process  Timeline  Next steps 6. Decisions for next meeting? 7. Evaluate Meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting (February 17, 2010) BREAK 8. Protective Options  Review Drawings  Next Steps Draft Agenda for January27, 2010 Meeting (HPMP Discussion) 1. Review notes/agenda/action items 2. HPMP Revision Update  Check-In on Review Process & Timeline  Discussion of Section 5  Revisit pg. 154: NFS Lands  Revisit pg. 154: Actions under Maintenance Guidelines and Archaeological Treatment Plan  Revisit Sections 5.3.2 Para. 2 re CRC qualification/professional archaeologist  Revisit 5.3.5 Intro & Monitoring Program  Review Monitoring form and revisit 5.3.5 “Archaeological Sites” when revised.  Review 6/3 Reporting  Review Curation Plan  Further Discussion of Unresolved areas listed in Comments Log  Other issues?  Next Steps LUNCH 3. Decisions? 4. Evaluate meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting?  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group  FINAL 1/6/10 Notes, Page 5 of 5     2010crag20100106.pdf en 