Final Public Meeting Notes August 5, 2010 / 9 a.m. – 1 p.m. / Burlington, Snoqualmie, Web-X, Call        Baker River Project License Implementation     Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Public Meeting Notes Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Snoqualmie: Tony Fuchs, Kim Lane, and Ira McDaniel (PSE); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); and Bob Nelson (RMEF); Burlington: Haley Edwards, Scott Heller, and Mel Walters (PSE); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Bob Kuntz (NPS); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Don Gay (USFS); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA); By Phone: Ann Risvold (USFS) and Will Wharton (PSE) DECISION TODAY: None TRIG MEETINGS: September 2, 10/7, 11/4, 12/2 NEXT ARHWG MEETING: Scheduled w/ ARG, August 10 NEXT BOTANICAL TEAMLET MEETING: October 6 ACTION ITEMS  Brock Double-check WDFW's take on the latest property  Kim / Will Provide an updated, multi-year budget spreadsheet for elk land acquisition fund  Tony Learn "Doodle" and use to identify date for a site visit to Property G  Ira Prepare maps showing parcel lines and topography for the new area TRIG is looking at, bring to next TRIG meeting  Tony Let Martha Bray know Ira will be her contact  Haley Send Loon Survey season summary to TRIG  Haley Button up with Lou Ellyn, then send Osprey Nest Tree / Marbled Murrelet Report to TRIG  Tony / Marty Invite Mark Hitchcock to a Fall TRIG meeting  Marty Work w/ Scott and Kathy re: adding Botanical info to the "current conditions" section of the Alder Creek Program Document  All Weigh in on Brock's proposed objectives, and provide any other comments on the current draft of the Alder Creek Program Document, by 8/19  Marty Send out the new draft of the Alder Creek Program Document by 8/26 PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS:  All Want to visit the parcel mentioned by Skagit Land Trust? Call Martha Bray, 360.428.7878  Tony Put a S.A. 514 conversation on the TRIG’s agenda this fall BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE PSE provides monthly email updates on Working Group activities to members of the BRCC. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. They are anticipating in-person meetings semi-annually. Kim reported that PSE met with informally w/ FERC regarding the license amendment to BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 8/5/10 Notes, Page 1 of 4    allow the powerhouse to be relocated. The amendment itself will be filed today. Kim thanked everyone for their support. Stan will provide a letter of support during the comment process. LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Ira provided an update on possible properties, including a property TRIG has looked at before. The landowner has renewed interest in possible trades in the area, thus changing the status of that property. Questions? Ask Tony or Ira. TRIG also authorized pre-acquisition survey activities on "Property G." Tony will learn "Doodle" and will use it to identify a good date for a site visit to this parcel. Bob K. and Brock reported on the property they visited last month (Property J). The site has about 22% coverage of cottonwoods and a good component of maple, so there is already good usage by our targeted species. Acquiring the parcel would protect some high-quality habitat that acts as a migration corridor to a passage to the Nooksack drainage. They also noted that this site would not need much O&M. They believe this is a good parcel to consider for Forest Habitat funds. The cost of the site would require partnering with other funders. TRIG members noted that this brings the benefit of stretching TRIG dollars; it also will require careful negotiation to ensure TRIG is able to obtain sufficient management, timber, and development rights to ensure TRIG gets sufficient - and documentable - species benefits for its investment. By consensus of all present, the TRIG authorized PSE to enter into preliminary negotiations regarding "Property J." A formal vote will be required before any funds are authorized toward purchase. BOTANICAL TEAMLET Kathy and Scott went to the Alder Creek property to look at Carex comosa, a state-listed sensitive species. They found more than 50 plants in the emergent wetland areas (management area #4). They noted that this is a biologically diverse area. A short management plan for this species will be included in the SA 509 management plan. Scott reported that ivy removal at the old spawning beaches at Baker is being rescheduled but will happen soon. There is a Carex flava visit scheduled for 8/19. The next Botanical Teamlet meeting is scheduled for 9/15. AERIAL SURVEY UPDATE Mel and Haley reported that an aerial survey was conducted 7/19. There were four active osprey nests, two with chicks present. There will be a formal osprey report at the next TRIG meeting. Haley also noted that there was a bald eagle nest with chick on Lake Shannon. Eagles have been spotted around Baker during the boat surveys, but no active nests could be seen around Baker Lake during the helicopter survey, possibly due to the late survey date. LOON PLATFORM UPDATE Haley walked the TRIG through a recap of the season; she will send the PowerPoint with the details and photos out to the full TRIG. OSPREY NEST TREES Haley and Mel went out with the arborist to evaluate the 13 nest trees and 19 additional nearby trees identified for alteration to ensure they do not create conflict with the Marbled Murrelet habitat. Mel will be onsite with the tree folks this weekend to start work on tree sites 6, 8, and 11. Costs for modifying the nest trees will be paid by the funding for SA 506; costs for modifying the additional, nearby trees (estimated to be $10-15k) may be billed to the Legacy Wood article. BUDGET UPDATE Will gave a verbal update on the status of various Terrestrial funds: BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 8/5/10 Notes, Page 2 of 4    Elk: Current balance is estimated at about $1.2 million. Will and Kim will provide an updated spreadsheet with details at the next TRIG meeting. Another $1.25 million (plus escalation) becomes available in year 5. Wetland: $340k (plus escalation) becomes available in year 4 (2012); $280k has been allocated to the Alder Creek purchase Riparian: $2 million (plus escalation) in year 3 (2011) Forest: $430k (plus escalation) in year 3 (2011); $60k has been allocated to the Alder Creek purchase ALDER CREEK MGMT PROGRAM DOC: Marty reported that he talked with Mark Hitchcock about Forest Practices rules and learned that we may need to submit an Alternate Plan to DNR in advance of any major clearing work. Tony and Marty will invite Mark to a TRIG meeting in the fall to help us understand the implications of possible management activities on the site as well as the related rules and procedures. TRIG talked about the various wetland buffers on the site, how they will be measured and what activities would be allowed or prohibited in each. Besides the wetland in Management Unit #4 with a 300-ft northern buffer and a southern buffer that protects the top of the valley slope for slope stability, the group agreed to start with the regulatory buffers and then evaluate each area on a case-by-case basis to determine whether additional distance is needed to meet our objectives, including the objectives of the various articles that contributed to this purchase. All buffers will be consistent with regulations, including Forest Practices rules. TRIG needs to define the restrictions for any additional buffers it allocates (ex: no clearing, but may allow manipulation of vegetation to improve habitat for migratory birds and wetland species). Don noted that the restrictions for each of the extended buffers might be different, depending on the primary management objective of the associated polygon. Current delineations seem to be sufficient for current needs. Additional detail could be added this fall when leaves fall off and GPS can work. All: Please weigh in on Brock's emailed wetland objectives and provide any other comments on the current draft by 8/19. Marty will accept all previous track-changes and send out a new draft by 8/26. Brock’ proposed objectives are listed below: Objective #1: Maintain a 300-foot buffer around the wetland in AC-W-4.0. On the Southern Border, leave a buffer on top of the bench that will protect slope stability. Objective #2: Maintain a buffer around the other wetlands. Use the sizes recommended by the WDFW Management Recommendations for riparian habitats: http://www.wdfw.wa.gov/publications/00029/wdfw00029.pdf. Objective #3: If monitoring determines the presence of non-native amphibians or fish, manage against these species without hurting native amphibian habitat. Please include the removal/abatement of source populations of the non-native species. Objective #4: Control/eradicate noxious weeds. Objective #5: In degraded wetlands, manage for emergent wetland types that will create habitat for native pond-breeding amphibians. Objective #6: Monitor for non-native fish and amphibians. Objective #7: Evaluate Native pond-breeding amphibian habitat by using the HSI Model modified during relicensing studies. Roads / Access: Haley and Tony updated the group on the proposed gate locations and costs. When Haley and Marty scouted locations, it became clear that it will be very difficult to keep ATVs from crossing the area designated as Gate 2. A gate will keep out trucks, but the area is very flat, making it easy for ATVs to make new trails around our blockages.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 8/5/10 Notes, Page 3 of 4    By consensus of all present, the TRIG authorized PSE to spend up to $25k for the five Alder Creek sites identified for gates and/or ecology blocks. They asked PSE to continue to monitor the gate 2 area for opportunities to further restrict ATV access. Meeting Evaluation:  Snoqualmie room great; today's Burlington room much preferred over the upstairs room  Nice use of technology; good to be able to see each other  Put Video Conference screen/camera on the same side of the room as the Web-X projection screen  Is it possible to hook the conference phone directly into the Video Conference line? Draft Sept. 2 Agenda 9 am – 3 pm, Snoqualmie (preferred)  "Property J" Decision  Report on pre-acquisition activities  Aerial Survey Report  Alder Creek Management Program Doc  Other items?  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 8/5/10 Notes, Page 4 of 4     2010trig20100805.pdf en 