Final Meeting Notes January 7, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call  Baker River Project License Implementation    Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  PRESENT BY PHONE Tony Fuchs, Cary Feldmann, Jacob Venard, Haley Edwards, Scott Heller, Christina VerHeul, Pam Garland (Team Leader of the Recreation and Aesthetics Working Group) and Ira McDaniels (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Don Gay and Ann Risvold (USFS); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Chris Danilson (Sauk Suiattle Indian Tribe); Bob Nelson and Bill Richardson (RMEF); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA).  DECISIONS: None today  NEXT MEETING: Feb. 4 (Web-X TBD), Mar. 4 (Web-X), Apr. 1 (likely in person from 9:00 -2:00), May 6, June 3, Jul 1, Aug 5, Sept 2, Oct. 7, Nov. 4, Dec. 2 (with Web-X capability)  ACTION ITEMS   Ira  Research Property M purchase potential and report back at our February TRIG meeting.   All  Review post acquisition activity outlines and provide comments to Tony by Jan 21 so they  can be addressed at our February meeting.   Bill  Send Tony the most recent information on the Wisdom Elk Habitat Model (available in  April of this year).   All  Send Tony any thoughts/known monitoring methodologies by Jan 21 so they can be  incorporated in Marty's next draft and reviewed at our next meeting.   Haley Send out dates of next bald eagle night roost survey: Jan 15, 28, Feb 11, and 25.   All  Let Haley know if you want to participate in any of these surveys.   All  Email Scott if you would like a copy of the Carex flava report.   Scott Send out agenda for February 3 botanical teamlet meeting to all by Jan 8.   Tony Attach PSE Attorney letter to these notes.  PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS   Ira  Contact the "Property T" owner, report back to TRIG.   Brock Continue WDFW review of "Property Z", report to Tony / Ira.   Ira & Ray Depending on response from Brock, contact owner of "Property Z."   Marty, Kathy, Scott, Haley - Create a GIS base map for the Alder Creek property.   Christina & Tony - Outline draft of how to allocate the associated costs between license funds.   Tony Check with Jacob about the 505 ARHWG and their next meeting date.   Christina Work on simplified budget report sheet, provide to TRIG when available.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 1/7/10 Notes, Page 1 of 4    Final Meeting Notes January 7, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call  COMMENT ON LAST MONTH'S MEETING NOTES Brock pointed out that the additional comments added onto the December 3rd, 2009 meeting notes were actually Don's comments and that he agreed with them in general by e-mail. He did make the additional comments attributed to him in the December 3 meeting notes.  BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE Cary reported that PSE is continuing to provide monthly email updates on Working Group activities to members of the BRCC. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. They are anticipating in-person meetings semi-annually.  TRIG BUDGET REPORT UPDATE Christina reported that she has been getting internal accounting squared away. This includes creating and funding all O&M accounts. On the capital side, the accounts relating to elk habitat have been completed. She will be meeting with PSE accounting folks to review existing WBS numbers and ensure that we have a good mechanism in place for budgets beyond capped accounts so everyone understands which buckets to put expenses in.  ANNUAL REPORTS Tony announced that he will be putting together the draft annual report in Feb/Mar and will send it to members for initial review according to the schedule in the article 501 TRMP.  LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE The Alder Creek Property (formerly known as Property Y): Tony thanked Ira for his efforts in closing the deal before the end of the year. Ira reported that the DNR had been hoping to grant the easement by the end of the year, but they could not get it finished by that time. They have completed their operational reviews and approvals. It is awaiting executive approvals. If the easement takes more than a year to get approved, $35K that has been held in escrow will be refunded to PSE. PSE has agreed to pay half of the easement price ($10K). This will be added into the closing costs for the acquisition. Ira's time (that is appropriate) will also be charged to the closing costs. This is in accordance with the protocols spelled out in the settlement. The $793K purchase price does not include the closing costs. The surveys of the property are nearly complete. The final accounting of the property purchase will be made available to the TRIG in the next month or two.  From an updated "pre-acquisition" map that Kathy and Joetta developed, Tony pointed out the 300 ft. buffers on the DNR Type A wetlands of the property, reflecting the buffer width discussed by the TRIG in our preacquisition agreement. The other two DNR wetland types are shown on this map with 150 ft. and 75 ft. buffers. Marty noted that as we put together our management plans, we may not be able to deviate from Forest Practice Rules.  Other Potential Parcels: After completing internal discussions at WDFW, Brock reported that he is in continued discussions with comanagers on Property Z, and will get back to us at our next meeting.  Ira will check into property M and see if he can find a listing and create some maps. It is likely for sale. He may work with Ray in doing this.  POST ACQUISITION ACTIVITIES  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 1/7/10 Notes, Page 2 of 4    Final Meeting Notes January 7, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call  We now need to develop the site-specific management plan for the Alder Creek property. This needs to be complete within one year of acquisition. We also need to complete our post-acquisition activities.  Tony and Marty went over the draft Post Acquisition Information Check List that included all activities that may be required (determined on a site-by-site basis). Marty walked us through a draft of Post Acquisition Information Collection Methods. These documents were sent to the TRIG via e-mail on January 6th.  All will review the check list and outlines and provide comments to Tony by Jan 21 so they can be addressed at the February TRIG meeting.  We decided to create a teamlet to develop criteria for quantifying/monitoring elk forage. Teamlet members include Brock, Bob, Tony, Marty, Kathy, Chris, and Don. Teamlet members were asked to email thoughts or suggested known monitoring methodologies to Tony by January 21. Bill reminded us that there will be additional information available on the updated Wisdom model available in April. He will keep us posted.  ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT PROPOSAL Cary reported that he followed up with PSE attorneys re: the Article 504 and 603 proposal. Tony sent out the letter from their attorneys on this to TRIG members for review during the meeting. Their response will be attached to these notes.  EAGLE NIGHT ROOST SURVEY UPDATE Haley reported that one survey has been conducted (December 30) since the last TRIG meeting. Two birds were observed during this last survey. Future survey locations will continue to include the osprey platform area or other areas where birds have been observed. Future survey dates are Jan 15, 28, Feb 11, and 25. Anyone interested in attending is welcome.  She is putting together a presentation that summarizes survey methods, sites, and results. She will likely present this at our April 1 meeting.  BOTANICAL TEAMLET Kathy reported that participants from PSE and USFS went on a site visit to the Washington Association of Conservation Districts Plant Material Center (WACD PMC). They produce rooted stock and cuttings of native plants. They also do contract growing and seed collection. For contract growing there is a need to sometimes schedule 3 years in advance. Rather that custom growing all the plants we need for the project, there is potential to buy the plants directly. We will continue to consider using the PMC to supply plants for the project, pending approval by the Forest Service for use on their lands..  Scott announced that the next teamlet meeting will be in Feb 3 with Reed Canarygrass management in the 7 wetlands as the primary focus for the meeting. Scott will be sending out the agenda soon.  The Carex flava study report has been finalized. This will serve as our baseline report on the number of Carex flava plants. It also outlines the methodology for follow-up surveys. It is available to be send to those requesting a copy (let Scott know and he will send it to you). This is available by request only as it contains some sensitive information.  TRIG MEETING LOCATION AND FREQUENCY  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 1/7/10 Notes, Page 3 of 4    Final Meeting Notes January 7, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call  We agreed to meet in person a couple of times a year and more frequently as agreed to by the group, re meeting on approximately a quarterly basis. The PSE offices in Burlington, Bothell, Bellevue, Snoqualmie, or Tacoma are good options for face-to-face meetings. These facilities also allow for videoconferencing. We will agree on the location on a case-by-case basis. MEETING EVALUATION Worked Well:  Displaying notes periodically to edit as we go We learned how to right click to expand Web-X to full screen Raising hands Web-X, Phone worked well Do Differently: Resolve technical difficulties Figure out how to display meeting notes in more automatic fashion Supply Food! February 4, 2009 Agenda BRCC / License Update, TRIG Budget Update Land Acquisition Update o Alder Creek celebration? o Update on Property M o Other properties Feedback on Post-acquisition outlines for Alder Creek Property Response to Adaptive Management PSE attorney response (?) Bald Eagle Survey Update Botanical Teamlet Update Other Updates? Evaluate meeting, set location and agenda for Mar. 4 Meeting  Additional Comments appended to these notes: In Brock's comments on the draft notes he offered the following on the Adaptive Management Proposal above to be added: In summary, by changing Article 504 as proposed, the TRIG would have to complete a License amendment as well as an amendment of the Settlement Agreement. In addition, the proposed amendment does not meet the conditions required by Article 603, the Adaptive Management Article. To meet the circumstance for the amendment, we would have to have a changed environmental or regulatory conditions. Team leader response to the additional comment: This is a somewhat incorrect paraphrase of the letter from PSE's attorneys and suggest TRIG members refer to the document provided by PSE.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 1/7/10 Notes, Page 4 of 4     2010trig20100107.pdf en 