Final Meeting Notes March 3, 2011 / 11 a.m. <ad> 3 p.m. / Burlington, Web-X, Call     Baker River Project License Implementation  Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Meeting Notes  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Mel Walters, Ira McDaniel, Scott Heller, Kim Lane by phone, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Bob Kuntz (NPS); Ann Risvold by phone and Don Gay (USFS); Patrick Goldsworthy and Jim Davis (NCCC); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA)  DECISION: None today TRIG MEETINGS: April 7, 2011 at a central location TBD BOTANICAL TEAMLET: March 22, 9-12:30 in Marysville (Ann's House)  ACTION ITEMS   Tony  Coordinate a central location for the April 7 TRIG meeting   Ira / Marty Collaborate re: Timber Plan for Property X   Stan  Talk with your constituents re: Property B and Tribal access on acquired lands   Tony / Cary If TRIG wanted to move forward on a short-term lease for an elk forage parcel, which fund  (acquisition or management) would pay for it?   Ira Let Property B owners know we are doing homework, will know more after April mtg   Tony  Talk with Elizabeth about PSE / Tribal agreement language re: access to acquired lands   Tony, Haley, Scott Compile list of suggested monitoring goals and potential activities related to Article  514, develop a draft monitoring plan, present to TRIG for review / editing  (Tony = lead for elk ideas; Scott = lead for wetlands; Haley = lead for forest)   All  Send 514 monitoring ideas to Tony, Scott, and Haley   Don  Send your elk-related 514 monitoring ideas to Tony  PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS:   Bob N  Send Tony contact information for RMEF elk forage expert who could help identify  appropriate site-specific methodologies for the activities described in the Program Doc   Kim/Gretta Put left-over Late Seral Forest money into TERF; update TRIG   All  Per BRCC, please ensure your organization's representative list is current and accurate  June 24, RMEF Field Review for Lewis River: Bob invited the team to attend the RMEF field review of management activities on lands related to the Lewis River project. He said it would be a great opportunity to see their forage enhancement efforts first-hand. Lou Ellyn agreed and encouraged folks to attend.  BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE PSE provides monthly email updates on Resource / Working Group activities to members of the BRCC. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. They are anticipating in-person meetings semi-annually; the next in-person meeting is tentatively scheduled for late April.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 3/3/11 Notes, Page 1 of 4    Cary let the group know that Ed Schild has changed jobs at PSE; PSE's new lead for the Baker license is Paul Wetherbee. Tony reminded folks that another big wave of annual reports will be coming out next month and the 2009 report will be submitted to FERC by the end of April. Signatories will receive DVD copies.  LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Property B: At the TRIG's last meeting, Tony and Chris M. brought forward a new property for the TRIG to consider. Ira was asked to contact the owner and report back. He confirmed that the owner is not interested in outright sale or long-term easements at this time, but they might consider a short-term (~5 years) lease / easement to manage the property for elk forage on a trial basis with the possibility of a longer-term agreement in future. TRIG noted the high elk forage value and current elk use of the parcel, but expressed reservations about short-term "rent-a-forage." Several TRIG members have homework related to access and funding questions; the group will revisit this question at the next meeting.  Property G: Ira updated the group re: his and Ray's negotiation with the owner. The owner rejected our offer, expressing the belief that the property is worth significantly more than the appraisal supports. The group agreed to move this property to a low priority and to take no further action at this time. Ira will stay in touch with the owner in case something changes.  Property X: Ira reported that property X remains under contract within the 90-day feasibility study period. He expects it to close in mid-April unless he needs to request an extension to finalize pre-purchase activities. The easement issue to ensure access to all parcels on the property has been resolved; Ira continues to work with WDFW on securing access road easement rights to the property. He reported that there are also a number of relatively small encroachments onto the parcel by neighboring land owners. The group talked about several possible solutions and agreed that all of the issues Ira has found are resolvable. He will keep us updated. The group should continue to maintain confidentiality about this acquisition during these final days before the property actually closes.  Access management for acquired lands: Tony asked the TRIG how it wants to manage public and Tribal access to Alder Creek and the other acquired lands. PSE needs to have a way to know who is on land they own. Don suggested and the TRIG agreed that access should be addressed on a case-by-case basis through each parcel's management plan. PSE's default process for similar properties (wind farm, etc) is to allow access with a permit, which can be made available at a local store or through online registration. Tony will connect with Elizabeth (PSE's cultural resources lead) re: PSE / Tribal access agreements.  POST-ACQUISITION UPDATE Alder Creek: Tony reported that the stream and wetland mapping is done! Bruce Stoker is on contract for the steep slope and road analysis. He has started the off-site research and prep work and will get onto the site as soon as weather allows. Elizabeth's cultural review is also awaiting the spring thaw.  Tony and Marty reported on the progress toward the application for an alternate forest management plan from DNR. Phase I of this work is to gather data and meet with DNR so they can confirm our eligibility. Tony expects to be ready for that initial meeting in the next month or so. Phase II will entail incorporating a more detailed list of expected management activities into a long-term plan. The alternate forest management plan (seeking a variance from the regular forest practices rules) will be embedded in that long-term plan. As agreed at the last meeting, Tony and Marty are taking the lead to develop a first draft of an action plan for the TRIG to review and edit.  EAGLE NIGHT ROOST SURVEY UPDATE Haley walked the TRIG through the Eagle Night Roost Survey report (emailed to the full TRIG March 2). A potential night roost was identified at the Feb. 28 survey. Eagles were observed in the stand of hardwoods just below the dam on the west side of the river. Haley and Mel will go out before sunrise tomorrow, March 4, to confirm. If it is confirmed, the next step would be to develop a roost management plan.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 3/3/11Notes, Page 2 of 4    The TRIG gave Haley a round of applause for doing an excellent job bringing structure to this process. Kudos and thanks, Haley, for a job well done! LOON UPDATE Haley reported that the Lake Shannon platform will be replaced this month with the newer design. The Baker platforms are already in; Haley will conduct a site visit to ensure they are upright and functional. She will report back, with pictures, at the next TRIG meeting. Loon surveys begin in April (2x/month). SIGNAGE Haley reported that she is working with PSE Corporate Communications and Pam (PSE's lead for the recreational resource group) to develop the boat launch bulletin boards and other signage. This will include the information about loons, aquatic invasive species, endangered species, water safety, etc. Questions or concerns? Contact Haley. BOTANICAL TEAMLET UPDATE Scott reported that the next Botanical Teamlet meeting is March 22, 9-12:30 in Marysville (Ann's House). The main objective will be to determine the 2011 noxious weed treatment plan at Baker. The 509 Habitat Management Plan should be available for TRIG review in April or May. Scott reported that he has contracted with the Carex Working Group to complete the Carex flava census this August. 501 REVIEW The TRMP calls for annual review, so Tony asked if any TRIG members propose changes to any of the associated plans. The group noted that there are some redundancies in the current reporting timelines, but it isn't something that warrants going through the process to change the plans at this time. 514 EFFECTIVENESS MONITORING Tony walked the group through a template for the 514 monitoring plan related to Articles 502, 503, and 504. The template included space for activity descriptions, criteria, cost / scope, and timing / schedule. Haley reported on her action item to research whether 506, 507, and 513 would need to be addressed in 514. She found that these articles include monitoring provisions and do not need to be included in the 514 plan. Haley and Bob K. developed a high-level list of potential monitoring actions related to 502. Bob noted that the 88.3 acres of hardwood and mixed hardwood/conifer on the Alder Creek property constitute a very small piece of land to monitor and expressed hesitance at generating a list of potential actions without first knowing the monitoring objective. This generated a lengthy discussion about the importance of understanding the purpose of 514 monitoring, especially given the available budget. Bob K. emphasized that it would be important to ensure that proposed actions are actually feasible and sustainable (don't want to start something that can't be maintained). Marty phrased the questions thusly: "What do we need to measure to be confident we are achieving our goals and getting our money's worth?" Scott shared a brainstormed list of potential monitoring actions for wetlands, and Tony had a list of elkrelated monitoring ideas available. Don didn't realize that the 514 item on today's agenda was to share and begin to prioritize potential actions; he has research and ideas for the elk-related monitoring, but didn't have that with him today. After much discussion, it was agreed that Tony, Haley, and Scott will take the lead on compiling potential monitoring actions and developing a draft 514 plan for the TRIG to review and edit. Tony will collect ideas for elk monitoring; Scott will collect wetland-related ideas; and Haley will collect forest-monitoring ideas.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 3/3/11Notes, Page 3 of 4    The license calls for the 514 plan to be completed by year 5 (October, 2013). Meeting Evaluation: Got a lot done today (Long list of things to get through) Great to have so many people together face-to-face Facilitation beyond adequate Folks hung in there well For future: better clarity about homework so all come equally prepared Draft April 7Agenda <ad> Central location TBD (Mill Creek or Everett) Agenda, Notes, A.I. BRCC / License Updates TRIG Budget Update Property X & B Updates Post-Acquisition Update, Alder Creek DNR Application Access Procedures Discussion Botanical Update Eagle Update Loon / Osprey Update 514 Update  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 3/3/11Notes, Page 4 of 4     2011trig20110303.pdf en 