Final Meeting Notes April 5, 2012 / 9 a.m. – 12 p.m. / Burlington, Web-X, Call        Baker River Project License Implementation     Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Meeting Notes Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Scott Heller, Jacob Venard, Mel Walters, Ira McDaniel, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacifica); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA) DECISION TODAY: “Does the TRIG adopt the December 2011 version of the SA 511 Decaying and Legacy Wood Implementation Plan as our current implementation procedures document?” TRIG MEETINGS: First Thursdays, generally bi-monthly or as needed. Next meeting: June 7, 2012. OTHER MEETINGS: FYI - The RMEF Elk Summit is at La Grand, Oregon this year, June 20th. Contact Bill or Bob (RMEF) if you would like more information. ACTION ITEMS  Cary Send Stan the sample tribal access agreement referenced today  Jamie Find the reference in TRIG notes to escalation on money borrowed between funds (see below)  Haley Email 502/514 monitoring proposal (survey song birds) to TRIG  All Please review the 502/514 monitoring proposal as soon as possible and provide feedback ahead of the meeting; if approved, the survey will need to take place shortly after the June TRIG meeting  Tony Queue up a decision re: the 502/514 proposal for the June meeting  Tony Distribute draft Burpee Hill Program Doc mid-May  All Review Burpee Hill Program Doc before June meeting PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS:  Tony Create a draft prioritization and schedule for the projects on the Alder Creek DNR LTA road plan for the TRIG’s review and consideration  Tony Consult with Steve D. (WDFW) re: the Goshawk nest survey and required habitat for nesting  Tony, Haley, Scott – Compile list of suggested monitoring goals and activities related to Article 514, develop draft plan for the TRIG to review / edit (Tony: elk; Scott: wetlands; Haley: forest)  Marty At next pre-acquisition, update data collection forms to include overstory/understory species  Cary, Stan – Coordinate meeting between PSE and the Tribes re: access on acquired lands Update on previous action items: Tony reported that adding an extra layer of password-protection to the FTP site isn’t feasible. The group had asked about this as an option for posting property-related information. He suggested, instead, that he will be happy to email information to any TRIG member upon request, and could use the FTP site on an “on demand” basis (posting information at a pre-agreed time) if anyone needs that to avoid overloading their email with large files. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL Notes, Page 1 of 5    Tony reported on his plan re: adding a draft prioritization and schedule to the list of tasks associated with the Alder Creek DNR LTA road plan. He will be walking the site with a contractor in May or June to get estimated costs associated with the activities. Once he has that information, he can develop a draft schedule for the TRIG’s review, probably in August or September. BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE PSE provides monthly email updates on Working Group activities to members of the BRCC. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. In-person meetings occur semi-annually. The next in-person BRCC meeting is scheduled for May 30 in Burlington. Please send Cary information about any agenda items you would like to see covered at the meeting. Cary referenced the latest BRCC email update and talked briefly about yesterday’s Cultural Resources (CRAG) meeting, which focused on historic features related to upcoming dam modifications. The Fish Passage Technical Working Group will meet next week to tour the old and new Floating Surface Collectors (FSC), Net Transition Structure (NTS), and upstream trap. 2012 FIRST QUARTER TRIG BUDGET UPDATE: Tony projected the TRIG accounting spreadsheet and walked the group through an update of each fund. He pointed out that there are still a few outstanding invoices to be posted, but this recap captures most of the first quarter of 2012. O&M Funds (rounded to the nearest hundred): 502 Forest: $5,500 503 Elk: $69,800 (Note: have spent about $5k toward Bruce S.’s road inventory; will cost $10-12 k total) 504 Wetland: $9,300 505 Riparian: $266k 508 Reed Canary Grass: $71,800 511 Legacy Wood: $57,900 512 Eagles: $1 514 Monitoring: $10,400 602 RAM: $108k 602 TERF: $8,100 Capital Funds (rounded): 502 Forest: $458,500 503 Elk: $448,000 504 Wetland: $380,500 505 Riparian: $2,449,500 Capital Transfers: The 502 forest fund still owes the elk fund $60k (Alder Creek) and a little over $24k (Burpee Hill). The 504 wetland fund still owes the elk fund $280k (AC) and about $242,400 (BH). The final transfers will be slightly higher once escalation is figured in. The Alder Creek repayments will need to include three years worth of escalation, and the Burpee Hill repayments will need to include one year of escalation. Tony will work with PSE accounting to calculate the final transfer amounts and square up the funds. Note: See page 2 of the notes from the November 4, 2010 TRIG meeting for reference of the original TRIG dialogue and agreement that borrowing funds should repay borrowed amounts with escalation in order to make the loaner fund whole at the end of the transaction. DECISION, LEGACY WOOD IMPLEMENTATION PLAN Proposed decision text: “Does the TRIG adopt the December 2011 version of the SA 511 Decaying and Legacy Wood Implementation Plan as our current implementation procedures document?” BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 4/5/12 Notes, Page 2 of 5    Haley reported that the version under consideration today includes Brock’s requested edits from the last meeting. She also noted that Brock (WDFW) and Bob (NPS) reviewed the plan and expressed their support via email. With those proxies, the group confirmed that quorum requirements were met. The decision was approved by consensus and the Legacy Wood Implementation Procedures Plan was adopted. It will guide the TRIG’s work going forward. Tony reminded the group that this plan - like the property Program Documents and the Plants of Special Status Plan - is one of the TRIG’s “living documents” and, as such, is subject to review and update as needed (for example, as new information becomes available or as conditions on the ground change). LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Ira reported that he received some comments back on the prioritized list of potential acquisitions and he modified the prioritization accordingly. He updated the group on those changes. He also reported on conversations he and Ray (RMEF) had with targeted landowners since the last TRIG meeting. The group talked about land owner interests and how TRIG interests may be in alignment. Questions? Ask Ira or Tony. POST ACQUISITION UPDATES Burpee Hill: Tony projected a map of the property. Field work for stream mapping is complete, and work is ongoing for wetland designations. Tony will be working with Joetta on updating the GIS map. They will also redraw the management unit (polygon) area boundaries to more closely match the habitat / topography of the site. Tony asked whether wetland buffers should be included within each wetland polygon, or whether the polygon boundaries should just include the wetlands themselves, without buffers. Marty advised the group to keep the polygon boundaries at the wetland edges (without buffers) to align them with forest practice rules. It also aligns the polygon boundary with an actual topographical/habitat-related boundary rather than a regulatory boundary; this matters because regulatory boundaries (e.g. wetland buffers) are subject to change, which would then make the polygon map obsolete if polygon boundaries were drawn to the regulatory boundary. He added two more reasons: the current buffers are not necessarily “no harvest” areas, but including the buffers in the polygons could give a false impression that they are “no harvest.” Including the buffers inside the polygons could also create confusion in future, possibly causing future managers to put buffers on the buffers. The group agreed that the polygons should align with actual habitat boundaries, and not include buffers. Tony wants to have a draft Burpee Hill Program Document out for TRIG review next month. Alder Creek: Tony reported on PSE’s work to update the Program Document with the information gained during the DNR LTA process. This includes updating the management unit (polygon) boundaries, increasing the detail in the roads plan, and updating the Legacy Wood prescriptions to match the newly adopted Legacy Wood Plan. The Burpee Hill Program Document is a higher priority since the license calls out for an initial plan within a year of acquisition (which would be this June 20th), so expect to see a draft of the updated Alder Creek Program Document sometime late summer or early autumn. Upcoming activities at Alder Creek include the Legacy Wood work and upgrading the road to improve access to the meadow (“Christmas Tree”) area. Based on the 2012 work plan the TRIG reviewed in February, Tony will move forward with a contract for the road work. He estimates that it will cost about $9k to brush out and re-gravel the road. This meets the interest of getting started with some “action on the ground.” Tony reported that he is also working with RMEF to coordinate a volunteer day at Alder Creek, tentatively set for the July 21st weekend. He attended the RMEF banquet last Saturday and put out an initial request. He will follow up and will update the TRIG at the June meeting.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 4/5/12 Notes, Page 3 of 5    BOTANICAL TEAMLET UPDATE: 504 Wetlands:  2011 annual report out for review 3-29 to 4-30  Updated amphibian egg mass survey 2012 plan with input from Brock, Jennifer B. (WDFW), Deanna Lynch and LouEllyn Jones (USFWS).  Burpee Hill property stream mapping occurred 3-5 and 3-7; wetland mapping occurred 3-22, lots of Red-legged Frog egg masses, No Oregon Spotted Frog (OSF).  Burpee Hill amphibian survey occurred on 3-28-12, a few Northwestern salamander egg masses, No OSF egg masses.  Alder Creek amphib egg mass survey occurred on 4-4-12, No OSF, a few Red-legged frog egg masses, NW salamander egg masses scattered throughout, lots of tree frog egg masses  Burpee Hill amphib egg mass survey April 17, Brock, Scott, Tony, so far.  Burpee Hill property bullfrog survey, visual and auditory, June Note: Scott showed photos of the wetlands and egg masses found during the amphibian surveys. Stan asked if we’ve ever found OSF on acquired lands; Scott confirmed that we have not. 508 Noxious Weeds:  Noxious Weeds HMP is almost ready for botanical teamlet review. The next botanical teamlet meeting will be scheduled when this is ready.  Planting of wetland emergent plugs at WB-17 (near Panorama Point) in April, will look at planting site on Apr 11 for snow levels, standing water at site, etc.  Going to Baker Lake Rd/1106 Rd on Apr 11 to meet Earth Corps. They will be planting Reveg Unit 1 berm at the 1106 Rd.  Survey and Map WB-20 and 21 (two of the seven selected wetlands for Reed Canary Grass management) Apr-May  Reed Canary grass photo monitoring of treatment and monitoring plots at WB-17 and WB-30, April and May  Survey/map wild chervil population at Alder Creek, mid-May The group talked about planned Reed Canary Grass control activities and replanting. Kathy pointed out that one of the intents on this article is to try some newer management activities to see if we can identify more effective responses. It will be interesting to track what we learn. 509 Plants of Special Status:  2011 annual report out for review 3-30 to 4-30. Photos have been added. :)  Plants of Special Status monitoring surveys, PEPA (species of lichen) at Chadwick Creek, PLOR (Round-leaved rein orchid) at Lower Sandy, fieldwork needed at WB-23, 27, and 28. Mid-May to Dec. 510 Carex flava:  2011 annual report out for review 3-30 to 4-30  Carex flava Conservation Management Plan (CMP) was sent out to TRIG for a 2-week review period on 2/28 and notice of decision for approval. Scott received responses from Brock (WDFW) and Bob (RMEF), and the plan was approved by consensus as indicated by the lack of opposition.  POAST herbicide test on PSE owned lands, look at WB-7 (near west pass dike) and WB-9 (near UBK dam) in June, once plants are growing. Determine sites where sedges, rushes are growing in and amongst reed canarygrass to test POAST effectiveness. LOON PLATFORM / SURVEY UPDATE Haley reported that the first loon survey has occurred. No loons were observed. Haley showed photos of the platforms and updated the group on each platform’s status. The Lake Shannon platform was installed 3/22; BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 4/5/12 Notes, Page 4 of 5    Haley added burlap and vegetation. There is a new float rope being ordered; it will be installed by the start of the boating season. The Anderson Creek platform needs some maintenance, which Haley is coordinating. There were geese seen in the area, but not on the loon platform. The Noisy Creek platform is still in good shape from last year. There were no geese nesting on that platform, either. LEGACY WOOD ACTIVITES Haley suggested that the TRIG snag Alders at two more sites in Management Unit 2 of the Alder Creek property this year. The purpose of creating snags/logs is to accelerate progression toward more desired species and provide short term Legacy Wood resources (primarily foraging substrate). It would also help open up the canopy and create better elk forage. She projected a map of the property and reviewed the proposed sites, which include creating 10 snags and 10 trees for logs. She reported that the Arborist and Brock (WDFW) have reviewed the proposal. She noted that all three sites (the one already done and these two proposed sites) can all be done within the $10k approved for Alder Creek Legacy Wood work last fall. No opposition was voiced. 502 FOREST (SONG BIRD) / 514 MONITORING PROPOSAL Haley walked through a proposal for baseline monitoring at Unit 2 of Alder Creek. She is suggesting the TRIG authorize one season of songbird surveys, preferably this year in order to get the baseline survey done before management work commences. She has been coordinating with the Puget Sound Bird Conservatory to develop a protocol for the surveys, and she will be attending songbird identification training at the conservatory next month (not charged to the Baker budget). She suggests one day of work to establish the survey locations, and another day to survey / record birds in June. She estimates the cost for this would come in under $3k, and noted that there is $10k in the budget for 502-related O&M. Under normal circumstances, this work would be authorized by approval of the related plans (ex: annual sitespecific work plans and 514 monitoring plans). Since the 514 plans haven’t been developed yet and this work wasn’t included in the 2012 Alder Creek work plan, Tony will queue this up for a decision at the June TRIG meeting. Haley will send out the proposal via email for the TRIG to review prior to the meeting. Please let her know if you have any questions / suggested changes as soon as possible since the TRIG meeting will be very close to the suggested survey window.  Draft June 7 Agenda  BRCC/License Updates  Monitoring proposal decision  Land Acquisition Update  Post-Acquisition Updates o Burpee Hill Program Doc o Alder Creek Update  Loon Update  Botanical Teamlet Update  Possible: 505 ARHWG Meeting?  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  FINAL 4/5/12 Notes, Page 5 of 5     2012trig20120405.pdf en 