 Final RRG Meeting Notes February 22, 2012 / 9:00 – 10:30 / Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA 98233 Baker River Project License Implementation Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes February 22, 2012, 9:00 am – 10:30 am Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change) PRESENT Pam Garland, Scott Heller, Miriam Decker and Lynda Kupfer (by phone) (PSE); Ann Dunphy, Greta Movassaghi, and Carol Gladsjo (USFS); Corrina Koenig (Town of Concrete); Brock Applegate (by phone) (WDFW); Jeff Turner and Doug Chadwick (Whatcom Co. Sheriff’s Office); and Lyn Wiltse, note taker (PDSA Consulting) DECISION: “Shall the RRG approve USFS RAM funds Proposal for Swift Creek CG Accessibility Improvements and Sockeye Fisher Impact Mitigation, dated 02/07/2012?” Decision was approved by consensus. There was no opposition to the proposal. FUTURE RRG MEETING DATES 9:00 – 11:00 am on the second Tuesday of each month is a placeholder for potential meetings or conference calls. We will provide Web-Ex capability for these meetings to facilitate remote attendance. Next scheduled In-Person Meetings:  June 19, 2012 (RRG and LEP at the Project or Baker Lake Lodge – details to follow).  Oct. 16, 2012 (RRG and LEP) at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington. Website: All are invited to check out the new Baker Licensing website. You can find Baker River documents available to the resource groups such as resource group plans, reports, meeting notes, etc., via PSE.com: http://pse.com/aboutpse/HydroLicensing/Pages/Baker-River-Licensing.aspx NEW ACTION ITEMS  All In addition to the above dates, please continue to reserve the third Tuesday of each month from 9-11:00 for possible additional meetings or conference calls.  Pam Check on the availability of the Baker Lake Lodge for the June 19 meeting.  Pam Coordinate land and in-water water safety inspections with USFS.  Pam Request from the Forest Service a Notice to Proceed in order to extend the buoys at Swift Creek so the swimming area is wider and deeper.  Ann Send pictures of decals wearing out at Horseshoe Cove to Pam so she can follow up with the manufacturer about their premature fading. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes February 22, 2012 Page 1 of 5  Linda Ask Jeff to contact Pam about the HPA effective date or potential update for changes to the Swift Creek buoys. (Done!)  Linda Check with Andy Hunting on update on keeping website (see above) current. (Done! Linda spoke with Andy and learned that the website is current through approximately November of 2011. There has been a change in the process since then and Andy now expects to updates posted to the site approximately monthly, including the post-November documents he has received.)  Cary Send out new org chart. Lyn will check on this.  Cary As Brock is unable to attend the next BRCC meeting (and he had to leave this meeting early) check with him re the proposed agenda and see if he plans to send a representative in his place.  Brock Ask if there might be adverse effects from dumping fish guts in the reservoir and if there is a suggested protocol we can introduce (e.g., not on land, not near shore, etc.).  Brock Get Sockeye catch data and share with all. Update: these data are not yet available. ONGOING ACTION ITEMS  All Let Pam know of any updates to the contact list for your organization.  Pam Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration (e.g., I&E) – ongoing.  Pam Put a project in the database for paving the lower lot and boat launch area to allow for additional parking. This is slated for 2017. If possible, she will look at rolling it out sooner. REVIEW OF AGENDA AND MEETING NOTES We reviewed the meeting notes (already finalized) from our last meeting on October 18, 2011. They have been posted to the PSE website. We also reviewed the agenda and added a few additional items to be discussed. BRCC UPDATE On February 1, Cary emailed out his monthly report on Resource Group license implementation activities to the BRCC. In this email he announced a change of date for the next in-person BRCC meeting from April 25 to April 10. The date change was in response to requests by members who were unable to attend on the 25th. The meeting will be combined with the ARG meeting at the PSE Skagit Service Center. The fourth Wednesdays will continue to be reserved throughout 2012 for BRCC conference calls as needed. RAM FUND DISCUSSION Ann walked us through a handout detailing the purpose and justification for the Forest Service proposal to use RAM funds to continue accessibility improvements, complete items included but not funded in the Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment Plan and to minimize the impacts of the sockeye fishing season at the Swift Creek Campground. Specifics include the following items:  Addition of second shelter (24’ x 30’ structure) that was planned in the design. It will look like the existing structure with the exception of a concrete floor. They plan to also put a concrete floor in the existing structure as the gravel is not up to spec and is harder to maintain (always moving around). Both structures would be fully accessible.  Purchase of 4 additional dock modules and 4 additional wing docks to increase the temporary tie- up and overnight moorage at the boat launch. They would extend the dock by about 40’ and add 2 wing docks on each side. Note: This would make the dock about 20’ shorter than the original BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 2/22/2012 Notes, Page 2 of 5 dock. They are hoping this will improve the situation considerably during the sockeye fishing season. Ann also reviewed with us the second page of the proposal illustrating, for transparency purposes, a tabular summary of how the 2010 funds were spent. The bottom part outlined the proposed RAM 3 funding and the estimated costs. In entertaining this decision we discussed the following: FS / WDFW MOU The FS and WDFW decided to implement the MOU between their agencies. When PSE implements projects they are still required to follow the standard HPA process. Greta understands that most FS actions do not require an HPA. Greta and Jeremy Gilman will call Brock to discuss the MOU in reference to the docks. Right now the docks are floating systems (vs. on pilings). They don’t anticipate having to install any additional anchor screws so there would be no additional disturbance to the lakebed. RAM Fund Spending / Reporting Protocols There is a draft project evaluation process introduced by Kim Lane that has yet to be approved by the BRCC. Greta reported receiving an email from Cary suggesting that we need to establish protocols around the accounting for RAM funds proposed and spent. An example of the type of questions that need to be addressed:  If the actual costs for a particular item come in well below the amount requested in the proposal, then is the proposer free to spend the remaining funds as they choose or should the remaining funds be returned to the RAM fund?  When is the proposer required to come back and ask permission to make a change from what was originally proposed? Currently all we have is the annual report to look at what was spent. Cary will take the lead in inserting a protocol into the proposal document for review by the BRCC. We get to go first because we are spending money sooner than the other resource groups. We can look for examples of other grant protocols to see how they address this issue. We will work on developing a protocol for approval by the BRCC at their next meeting on April 10. This issue is coming up also for the ARHWG. OTHER RRG ITEMS 302: Aesthetics Resources Implementation Plan (ARIP) This plan includes detailed specifications for vegetation screening, including a list of native plants, acceptable colors, and types of materials that can be used for certain project features. Planting for the Upper Baker screening project will occur in 2014. This plan includes a description of native vegetation, colors, and which materials to use. This article calls for licensee to plant landscaping in the area of the visitor’s center and associated parking area at the Lower Baker River Operation Complex Center and to plant native vegetation to screen the yards, buildings and fence of the Upper Baker Operations and Maintenance yards from the Kushan Campground and USFS 1106 Road, as well as other identified provisions to reduce visual effects. Greta announced that on March 6, 2012 she will be meeting with Cary and Jacob Venard to discuss erosion control design for Swift Creek. They will also discuss the contract for Article 110 (erosion) in hopes of coming up with an implementable design. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 2/22/2012 Notes, Page 3 of 5 304: Water Safety (Recreation Hazard Monitoring / Swim Area Correctives) Pam will be working with Ann, Greta and Brock to make corrections at Swift Creek swim delineation. Ann will send Pam pictures of the decals that are fading so she (Pam) can follow up with the vendor. Other options under consideration are bringing the lines in at the end of the season and then redeploying them again each year. Pam announced that she, along with PSE maintenance staff, will be performing land inspections of the boat launch areas. When the water comes up (May timeframe) they will do a similar inspection by boat. They will photograph debris, etc. Any correctives will need to be addressed. There will be an on-land view of the potential recreational hazards with launching boats, etc. Swim areas and boar launches are called out. If debris or hazards are found on the lake, it is PSE’s responsibility to address. She will let the Forest Service know when she plans these inspections so they can attend. Pam asked if there is a need for additional water safety maps or tear sheets for next season. Ann mentioned the FS is looking at the posting again to see if they need to adjust the content. They are reviewing this along with the interpretive plan. It seems like we need to make the bulletin boards larger and tweak existing content. LEOs found them to be very effective. The fishermen were very appreciative of fishing regulations being made available to them. There are now more new people visiting the Basin than ever before. Could water safety funds be used to provide PFDs as loaners? Pam reported there are not sufficient funds available for this. Ann is considering adding flashing lights to mark corners of the log boom because folks launching in the middle of the night need markers. They would be solar powered and would be installed this spring. Sockeye Impacts to Recreation Ann walked us through a summary handout of impacts related to the robust sockeye fishing season. The fish return is anticipated to be 50% larger this coming season than it was last year. There has been an adverse impact on facilities and shoreline resources on Baker Lake. These impacts have created the need for additional FS personnel to working to minimize the effects of these impacts. To discuss with LEO’s: Emergency (“Call 911”) signage  Personal Flotation Devices (PFDs)  Other youth programs June 19, 2012 RRG at Baker Lake Lodge?? MEETING TOPICS TO INCLUDE  BRCC Update o Project Evaluation protocol for RAM funds o Review updated FERC Boundaries (?)  Walk through Preparations for the Season o Review information boards / changes to information provided o Standardize the information at Kulshan  Field trip to Swift Creek Campground o Monitoring / feedback on programs, dispersed sites o Upgrading of boar ramps o Other resource impacts o Prioritize projects, strategize accordingly BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 2/22/2012 Notes, Page 4 of 5  Update on Water Safety  Other Topics?  Evaluate Meeting A brief LEP Meeting will follow where we will review LEO Orientation packets.. HANDOUTS  October 18, 2011 RRG Meeting Notes  February 22 RRG Meeting Agenda  Forest Service Justification for use of RAM 3 Funds: 2/7/2012  Forest Service Summary of Impacts of the 2011 Sockeye Fishing Season on Baker Lake : 1/13/2012 MEETING EVALUATION Worked Well:  Kept to the agenda  Good participation  Conversations off-line between meetings were helpful in moving us forward  We made a decision  Some LEOs were present for the meeting Do Differently:  Start on time  Address phone issues  Consider meeting at Baker Lake Lodge on June 19.  Linda completed her Action Items real time! BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 2/22/2012 Notes, Page 5 of 5  