Final Meeting Notes March 7, 2013 / 9 a.m. <ad> 2 p.m. / Burlington, Lync Online, Conf. Call  Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Scott Heller, Haley Edwards, and Ira McDaniel (PSE); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Theresa Mathis and Shauna Hee (USFS); Emily Wirtz (Sauk-Suiattle); Peter McBride (Swinomish); Brock Applegate by phone (WDFW); Bob Nelson by phone (RMEF); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA). DECISIONS TODAY Decision #1, as published in the agenda (subsequently amended, see below) Does the TRIG agree to adopt the December 2012 version of the SA 508 Noxious Weed Habitat Management Procedures, with approved edits, as our currently approved working document? 2013 TRIG MEETINGS Quarterly - June 6, Sept. 5 and Dec. 5 <ad> with conference calls to be scheduled as needed. OTHER MEETINGS Botanical Teamlet: April 11 BRCC: May 21, in Burlington ACTION ITEMS Tony Incorporate new contacts into the TRIG rep list (from Stan's email and today's attendance) Tony Coordinate a site visit to Burpee Hill and Alder Creek for new TRIGgers Tony Send reminder instructions for accessing the TRIG folder in the FTP site; also include directions for finding Baker documents on the public PSE.com website Tony Please post the DNR-LTA planning docs (maps, spreadsheets) relating to the BH site as you go, rather than waiting to post them all at once when the process is complete. Send out a brief update letting folks know what's available. Tony Send Scott the forage seed mix composition used at Alder Creek Brock Forward the email conversation you had with the WDFW Goshawk expert to the TRIG PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS: Haley Confirm that the 502/514 Survey Report was emailed to the full TRIG Lou Ellyn <ad> Ask Deanna L. to weigh in on suitable habitat for the possible reintroduction of Oregon spotted frogs on acquired lands (on hold to address after USFWS listing decision) Tony Create a draft prioritization and schedule for the projects on the Alder Creek DNR LTA road plan for the TRIG's review and consideration Tony, Haley, Scott <ad> Compile list of suggested monitoring goals and activities related to Article 514, develop draft plan for the TRIG to review / edit (Tony: elk; Scott: wetlands; Haley: forest) Stan <ad> Coordinate meeting between PSE and the Tribes re: access on acquired lands (still in the works)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Page 1 of 5    UPDATE ON PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS Stan believes that the listing decision related to Lou Ellyn's action item is still being finalized, so we will continue to stay tuned. Related to Stan's action item to address tribal access on acquired lands, Ira reported that he and Tom F. are nearly done with their work on a draft permit. Tony noted that the 514 plans are due in October 2013, so a decision to adopt the plans will be needed most likely at the September meeting. He will work with Haley and Scott to plan their work with the TRIG's June and September meeting dates in mind.  SAFETY MOMENT Tony oriented new TRIG members to the facility, noting emergency exits and first aid stations. He also encouraged folks to be careful when driving to and from the building. There is a new stop sign at the railroad tracks near to the driveway. There are more trains coming and going these days; please pay attention when you cross the tracks.  BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE The fourth Wednesdays will continue to be reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. In-person meetings are scheduled semi-annually (spring and fall). Tony shared a few highlights from the latest BRCC update. He noted that the Lower Baker FSC is up and running (very exciting for our friends on the ARG!); Large Woody Debris is now available for enhancement projects (procedures still being finalized); and, it is generally an exciting summer with big projects at the powerhouse and spawning beaches. The next in-person BRCC meeting is scheduled for May 21 in Burlington.  TRIG Budget Update: Tony projected the current budget spreadsheet. The numbers below represent the amount of money available in each fund at the end of 2012. Any additional comments are noted beside each fund.  O&M Funds, 2012 Year-End Balance  502 Forest  $5,137  503 Elk  - $10,116 This balance includes the expenditure of carry-over funds from 2011 and  $6,391 net income from the AC timber sale. Figuring in the 2013 deposit,  there will be about $45k ($39,884 plus about $5k in escalation) available for  work this year.  504 Wetlands $144,960 This account received its first infusion of money in 2012 ($140k).  505 ARH  $317,062 Tony noted that this fund is jointly managed by the TRIG and ARG. There  may be a proposal coming forward through the Article 505 Aquatic Riparian  Habitat Working Group process.  508 RCG  $50,414 Gets another $25k plus escalation in 2013  511 Legacy Wd $50,230 Gets another $10k plus escalation in 2013  512 Eagles  $24 This work is complete for this cycle of funding.  514 Monitoring $8,011 Tony noted that there is $100k available (only $2k of which has been spent so  far); it hasn't been allocated to this fund yet since there isn't yet a plan.  602 TERF  $8,172 Funding starts coming up regularly in license year 10 (2018). Money left over  from other specific articles will also be deposited here. The current balance is  left over from the Article 515 Late Seral Forest work.  Capital Funds, 2012 Year-End Balance  502 Forest  $154,240 *  503 Elk  $1,037,090 * Gets another $1.25M plus escalation in 2013  504 Wetlands $67,190 *  505 ARH $2,445,319**  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 3/7/13 Notes, Page 2 of 5    * Tony reported that the Forest and Wetland funds have repaid the loans they had from the Elk fund, so all three accounts are "squared up" and these numbers reflect accurate post-acquisition numbers. ** Important: Tony noted this amount does not reflect funds for projects that have been approved but not yet spent. Projects have been approved in each of the last two years that will reduce this balance. Jacob Venard is the team lead for the Article 505 Aquatic Riparian Habitat Working Group. Questions? Please contact him. LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Ira shared that the potential acquisition discussed at the last couple TRIG meetings will not go forward at this time and shared details about the negotiations. Ira also updated the group about his and Ray Croswell's (RMEF) next steps. For the benefit of new TRIGgers, Tony also projected the spreadsheet of properties that have been considered by the TRIG and went quickly through a brief history of the TRIG's acquisition efforts. Details about acquisition activities are not included in public notes. If you have any questions about current or previous acquisition activities, please contact Ira or Tony. Tony reminded the group that everyone is welcomed to bring forward ideas about possible acquisition targets. Ira and Ray take the lead on this work, but all signatories are encouraged to share suggestions. POST-ACQUISITION UPDATES Burpee Hill <ad> Tony reminded the group that his team is engaged in work needed for the Department of Natural Resources Long Term Forest Practices Application (DNR LTA). This is the same process that the TRIG completed for the Alder Creek property. The application requires quite a bit of survey work and supplemental documentation. Tony walked the group through a high-level review of the requirements (streams, wetlands, buffer widths, road assessments, steep slopes inventory, priority habitat and species map, etc.) and projected key documents and maps. Tony submitted the first step in the application on TRIG's behalf, and the DNR assembled an identification team (IDT) to review the documentation on-site. They made a few minor changes, removing the CMZ from Grandy Creek, for example. With the changes made by the IDT, the DNR has approved the first step of our Burpee Hill application. Just like the process we went through for Alder Creek, our next steps for this property will include delineation of management units and buffers, identification of harvest units and reserve tree areas, cultural / historic protection measures, and development of road management plans. Tony anticipates submitting the DNR's step-two document by the next TRIG meeting. Brock asked Tony to share maps and planning spreadsheets as they are available so folks can review them along the way, rather than waiting and posting all the materials when the application is submitted. Tony will post to the FTP site and will send out email updates to let folks know when new materials are available. Alder Creek <ad> Tony recapped the 2012 timber harvest and showed maps of where the new forage is located. The group talked about the pasture seed mix, which prioritizes elk appeal and nutrition. While the mix is not all native, none are invasive and folks around the table agreed that the plant composition represents a big improvement over the non-native invasives that dominated the area when the property was purchased. Tony will forward the composition list to Scott so he has that for the Botanical Teamlet's records. 2013 WORK PLANS Tony projected the 2013 work plans that were emailed to the TRIG in December and briefly reviewed at the December TRIG meeting. These work plans guide PSE's work throughout the year. Highlights include: Burpee Hill <ad> Most of this year will be focused on continuing our progress toward the DNR LTA. There will also be some amphibian egg mass survey and an assessment of deciduous forest habitat. This summer, the plan includes design work for road restoration to address water over the roadways at BH-1000 and BH-1100, and knotweed treatment.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 3/7/13 Notes, Page 3 of 5    Alder Creek <ad> Spring: Burn debris piles, disc and reseed pasture areas, rehab road surfaces, initial legacy wood work, and wild chervil surveys and treatment (about 7 acres affected). Summer: Round two of song bird monitoring, monitor snags, construct road and new gate at BI-36-10 (little road that goes into the southwest area of the western parcel; this extends the DNR road to the existing road on our system). Autumn: Blackberry follow-up treatment, plant cottonwoods and willows in deciduous management unit near legacy wood site. LOON UPDATE Haley reported that a new platform is being installed next Tuesday to replace the damaged Lake Shannon platform. The platform and anchoring system design is similar to the platforms on Baker Lake. The new location is a little further up towards Bear Creek on Lake Shannon in a section that receives less boat traffic but is in an area of the lake that is deep enough to remain watered throughout the season. Theresa expressed her support of the new location, adding that it looks like a well-protected area. The hope is that the new location and design will minimize log / debris snag damage. Loon surveys will start again in April and continue twice a month until July. The group agreed that this will be the year for loons to start using the platforms ... we hope! NOXIOUS WEED HABITAT MANAGEMENT PLAN Scott reminded the TRIG that the draft of this plan went out for review in December. Some comments were received and incorporated. He projected the edited document on the screen and walked the group through it, pointing out changes. He reminded folks that this is one of the TRIG's "living documents," which means that the TRIG can approve changes or updates at any time without needing to go through FERC. Approval today acts to formalize the plan. In addition to any "as needed" updates, this plan is scheduled for review and update every five years to incorporate updated plant listings. Decision, as published in the agenda: Does the TRIG agree to adopt the December 2012 version of the SA 508 Noxious Weed Habitat Management Procedures, with approved edits, as our currently approved working document? Once Scott "accepts" the tracked changes in the document, it will be saved as the March 2013 version, so the decision was amended as follows: "Does the TRIG agree to adopt the March 2013 version of the SA 508 Noxious Weed Habitat Management Procedures, including the approved edits, as our currently approved working document? We confirmed that a quorum is present and no proxies were indicated. The TRIG approved the decision as amended by consensus of those present. BOTANICAL TEAMLET UPDATE The next Botanical Teamlet is scheduled for April 11. ARTICLE 501 - TRMP Tony recapped the settlement agreement / license process and gave a brief overview of the license. There are 17 articles in the license related to terrestrial activities. The first of those is Article 501, Terrestrial Resource Management Plan, and serves as the umbrella plan for the other terrestrial plans. All the other terrestrial articles are appendices to 501 (except for SA 505). PSE, in consultation with the TRIG, developed the management plans and submitted them to FERC for approval. The license calls for a review of the TRMP (including its subordinate plans) by the end of March each year. The last two annual reviews have been perfunctory, with no suggested changes. When Tony asked the group about this year's annual review, he got a request to go back through the document to remind folks what's there, which is why we are going back through it now.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 3/7/13 Notes, Page 4 of 5    He projected the TRMP and walked the group through a high level review of what is included in the document. The group also looked for areas where it may want to consider changing / updating the TRMP. The only item that came up for discussion was to consider updating the reporting schedule to improve alignment between the work itself and the reporting timeline, evaluate whether a second round of formal review is needed for all reports, and reduce redundancy for those areas that have both management reports and annual reports. The group had mixed feelings about whether the reporting schedule would benefit from a change, and they all agreed that this idea is not a high priority at this time. It is good to have a note to circle back to this if or when some other desired change makes it worth our while to go through the FERC amendment process. MEETING EVALUATION Worked Well:  Great attendance, welcome new TRIGgers! Now that we are meeting less often, it is important to pay attention to our process (Good to regularly remind ourselves: Why this? Why now? What's next?) Food good, quantity right ... thanks, Jamie, for the PB Pie ! Do differently: In response to our new quarterly schedule, Tony: please ask for changes to the draft agenda when you send out the draft notes for TRIG review and ask again when you send out the meeting notice The group wants to try a different order of events for the agendas: Move brief updates and items that are likely to require short discussions to the beginning of the agenda so they don't get squeezed on time. Move the Post-Acquisition Updates / Work Plans Review close to the end of the agenda and move the budget update to be last (When the budget update is at the beginning of the meeting, it is too tempting to stray into other updates, causing duplicate conversations.) Draft June 6, 2013 Agenda: Welcome, Go Round Safety Moment; Review Agenda, Notes, and Action Items BRCC / License Updates Botanical Teamlet Update Loon Survey Update Osprey Update? 514 Monitoring Plans <ad> Review draft, plan for September approval? Land Acquisition Update Post-Acquisition Updates and Work Plan Review o Burpee Hill o Alder Creek TRIG Budget Update Evaluate the meeting; Set draft agenda for Sept. 5  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 3/7/13 Notes, Page 5 of 5     2013trig20130307.pdf en 