 Final Meeting Notes July 1, 2010 / 9 a.m. – 12 p.m. / Burlington plus Web-X, Call Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Meeting Notes Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Cary Feldmann, Haley Edwards, Scott Heller, Will Wharton by phone, and Ira McDaniels (PSE); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Greta Movasaghi (USFS); Patrick Goldsworthy and Jim Davis (NCCC); Martha Bray (Skagit Land Trust); Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA). DECISION TODAY: Yes, see below TRIG MEETINGS: August 5, 9/2, 10/7, 11/4, 12/2 NEXT ARHWG MEETING: Tentatively scheduled w/ ARG, August 10 ACTION ITEMS  Tony Email the Alder Creek Timber Mgmt Plan to TRIG  Will Provide TRIG w/ the estimated fund balance in Article 502 after the Alder Creek allocation  All Want to visit the parcel mentioned by Skagit Land Trust? Call Martha Bray, 360.428.7878  All Come to the 8/5 TRIG meeting prepared w/ your comments on the Alder Creek Program Doc  Haley Bring cost estimate for installing gates at Alder Creek property to 8/5 TRIG meeting  Tony Check room availability, confirm location for 8/5 TRIG meeting  Marty & Tony Insert draft language into the blank sections of the Alder Creek Program Doc, bring 8/5 PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS:  Tony Put a S.A. 514 conversation on the TRIG’s agenda this fall BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE PSE provides monthly email updates on Working Group activities to members of the BRCC. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. They are anticipating in-person meetings semi-annually. The BRCC met June 8 with the ARG at Baker and included resource group updates and tours of the new facilities. Cary shared information about PSE’s pursuit of a license amendment to allow the powerhouse to be relocated. The license calls for two 750 units in order to continue to use the old penstocks in the existing powerhouse. Upon further review of cost assumptions, soil conditions and space constraints of the old site, it was decided that a single 1,500 unit in a different location would be a better solution. Additional information about this and the Flow Continuation Study can be found in the notes from the May 11 ARG meeting. TRIG Budget: TRIG members met Will Wharton by phone; he will be stepping into Christina's role of support for Baker license-related budget tracking, including TRIG. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 7/1/10 Notes, Page 1 of 4 Final Meeting Notes July 1, 2010 / 9 a.m. – 12 p.m. / Burlington plus Web-X, Call DECISION: Does the TRIG authorize PSE Real Estate (Ira McDaniel) and the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation (Ray Croswell) to continue to search for potential properties related to Settlement Articles 502, 503, and 504, and bring those potential properties to the TRIG for review, with the expectation that PSE Real Estate and RMEF would work approximately 2 days per month each with the approximate total cost of $3,000 per month (including expenses) charged to the acquisition funds for above articles? Quorum Present? Yes. Proxies? No Approved? Yes. TRIG agreed by consensus of all present to authorize funds for the property search process as outlined in the decision above. NCCC PROPOSAL TO INCREASE THE N. CASCADES NAT’L PARK Jim Davis (NCCC) presented information about the North Cascades Conservation Council’s proposal to designate land from Baker Lake east to the current North Cascades National Park into additional park land. He noted that the proposal would not impact any privately-owned lands. He described the primary benefit of the proposal as being increased protection for lower-elevation habitat, including salmon-bearing creeks and headwaters. He also referenced economic benefits, including federal investment into the area (ex: visitor center) and an increase in local jobs. Gretta pointed out challenges associated with the ongoing O&M costs of visitor centers, and noted the Forest Service’s different approach managing wilderness, including minimal tool use and maintenance of wilderness character. Brock asked whether the potential for increased development in and around Marblemount and Winthrop had been considered, and Jim confirmed that it had, noting that the plan would be to place the visitor center in an already developed area. A map of the proposal can be found on the NCCC website: www.americanalps.com. NCCC’s timeline is to formalizer the proposal by fall; from there, any progress would be at the pace of Congressional leaders. Pam Garland (PSE’s Recreational Resource Group team leader) attended the presentation and will work with Jim to coordinate a similar presentation to the RRG. BOTANICAL UPDATE: Scott reported that he has been working on the implementation documents for Plants of Special Status and Carex flava as well as the annual report for noxious weeds. He and Kathy are working on GPS mapping of Reed canarygrass in wetlands WB-17 and WB-30, and he will bring that to a future TRIG meeting. Sound Native Plants was hired to grow the plants for re-vegetation after Reed canarygrass management and they will collect seed this summer, so that process has begun. Teamlet will likely meet again in September. OSPREY NEST TREES: Mel couldn't be here today. Haley reported that 13 trees have been selected and were reviewed by the arborist for feasibility. The selected trees are also being evaluated to ensure they do not impact Marbled Murrelet habitat. Once the evaluation is completed and the USFWS concurs, PSE plans to move forward. Haley also reported that there are currently four active Osprey nests. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 7/1/10 Notes, Page 2 of 4 Final Meeting Notes July 1, 2010 / 9 a.m. – 12 p.m. / Burlington plus Web-X, Call EAGLES: Haley sent out the Night Roost Survey Annual Report yesterday, kicking off the 30-day review period. Another round of surveys starts this November. LOONS: There have been two more surveys since the last TRIG meeting. On June 10, two loons were sighted (1 at UB, 1 at LB), neither near a platform. On June 28, there were 12 observations, none close to a platform, all adults, at least one pair. There will be two more surveys in July, tentatively July 13 and 28. LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE: Tony, Ray, and Ira have combined their respective lists of properties the TRIG has considered into one master list with notes showing the activities and status of each parcel. Tony noted that all of the properties have been viewed through the lens of benefit to elk forage, so some of the ones that have been rejected or put on a low priority status for elk may have benefit for other articles. Ira projected a map showing several properties about which he has conducted additional research and the group discussed each. Questions? Ask Ira or Tony. Greta referenced a 6/10/10 multi-stakeholder meeting of parties who are or will be pursuing properties in the Skagit Basin. The goal of the group is to coordinate efforts and avoid competition or duplication of efforts. Greta took an action item from that meeting to pull together notes and draft a proposal about creating an ongoing forum for continuing this dialogue; she will send that to Tony to distribute to TRIG and ARHWG. SKAGIT LAND TRUST PROPOSAL: Martha Bray of the Skagit Land Trust joined the group to present information about a potential property. Ira, Brock, Haley, Scott, and Lou Ellyn expressed interest in a site visit; Don (USFS) and Bob (NPS) might also be interested. Martha will coordinate. Questions? Call Martha at 360.428.7878. ALDER CREEK MGMT PROGRAM DOC: Marty and Tony put "straw dog" prescriptions into the program doc and sent that out two weeks ago. So far, Marty has only received comments from Brock and Don. Others at the meeting expressed a desire to weigh in. There are still sections that are blank (placeholders only, primarily background information, ex: article language). The group confirmed that, although the Program Doc will be a "living" document, it will be considered complete when the TRIG comes to agreement on the polygon boundaries, the primary mgmt focus for each polygon (elk, birds/forest, fish), the mgmt objectives, and initial prescriptions related to each. TRIG agreed to set aside a good portion of the 8/5 meeting to go through the program document section by section and come to agreement on proposed final language. In the meantime, Marty and Tony will put draft language into the blank sections and bring that with them to the 8/5 TRIG meeting. All: please come to the 8/5 meeting prepared, with your comments identified in advance and ready to share / discuss. Re: Roads, Ira and Tony developed a proposal to control motorized access to the property with three gates and two installations of ecology blocks. They met with the DNR and DNR is OK with our plans as long as BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 7/1/10 Notes, Page 3 of 4 Final Meeting Notes July 1, 2010 / 9 a.m. – 12 p.m. / Burlington plus Web-X, Call we keep them informed and use their lock (dual lock system) if the gate is on their road. Haley will research the cost and we will talk more about this 8/5. Meeting Evaluation:  Great presentations  Room small, no windows, limited restroom access  Ambitious agenda  Move big topics to the top of the agenda Draft Aug. 5 Agenda 9 am – 3 pm, Location TBD  Alder Creek Management Program Doc  Land Acquisition Update  Loon / Osprey Update BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 7/1/10 Notes, Page 4 of 4  