 Meeting Notes January 19, 2011 / 10:00 a.m. – 2:00 pm / PSE Skagit Center, Burlington Baker River Project License Implementation Cultural Resource Advisory Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE), (425) 462-3609, elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com. PRESENT Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Chris Miss (Northwest Archaeological Associates), Candace Wilson (Facilitator, PDSA Consulting), Larry Campbell (Swinomish Indian Tribal Community), and Jan Hollenbeck (United States Forest Service). By phone: Heather Miller (HRA). DECISIONS: None today NEXT MEETING: February 16, 2011, 10 a.m. – 2 p.m., Skagit Center, Burlington FUTURE MEETING DATES: 2011 dates: March 8 (with Aquatics Resources Group), March 16, April 20, May 18, June 15, July 20, August 17, September 21, October 19, November 16, December 21. JANUARY 19 AGENDA 1. Review notes / agenda / action items for November 17, 2010 meeting 2. Review recent BRCC meeting activities, licensing updates 3. Decisions Required at Today’s Meeting: None 4. Project Updates  Baker Clubhouse  Lower Baker Dam  Lower Baker FSC  Archaeological report  Channel Creek Spawning Beaches  March 8 Joint meeting with Aquatics Resources Group Lunch 4. Project Updates, continued  Stabilization Project  Swim Line 5. Annual Project List 6. Decisions for next meeting? 7. Evaluate Meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting (January 19?) NEW ACTION ITEMS  NWAA Provide monitoring during installation of swim line at Horseshoe Cove.  Elizabeth Get more information on the swim line project, e.g. what size blocks, how excavation will be managed, etc.  Elizabeth Send Annual Project List to CRAG members. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 1/19/11 Notes, Page 1 of 7 Meeting Notes January 19, 2011 / 10:00 a.m. – 2:00 pm / PSE Skagit Center, Burlington PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS  Elizabeth Send HPMP letter documenting research on sites in Lower Baker FSC APE and recommending determination continue as ineligible to CRAG members. In process.  Mark (LB Dam Overtopping Project) Initiate a non-disclosure agreement and send the feasibility study to Stephen at SHPO (or send to Elizabeth to forward). In process.  Elizabeth (LB Dam Overtopping Project) Send out an Initiation of Consultation letter to the consulting parties that outlines the results of this meeting and a draft of the proposed MOA for 30-day review. In process.  Jan: Share survey results on FS 1106 project with CRAG (2nd phase).  Elizabeth: Proceed with curation of collections at the Burke by 9/30/10 with Burke and NWAA. Ongoing. REVIEW NOTES / AGENDA / ACTION ITEMS Notes Notes from the November 17, 2010 meeting were approved with one change: Page 4, Paragraph 3 to read as follows: “Jan asked about the original roof, and there was some discussion about whether it is feasible to make a more compatible replacement. Rhoda Lawrence commented that the roof was changed from the original to better handle environmental factors, and other materials are not feasible for the slope.” Final notes will be sent to CRAG members by email. Agenda The revised agenda was approved as sent to CRAG members. Report on Action items Elizabeth Send HPMP letter documenting research on sites in Lower Baker FSC APE and recommending determination continue as ineligible to CRAG members. In process. This should go out this week. Elizabeth Confirm Nov. 22 meeting regarding the Baker Clubhouse with SHPO and send information to CRAG members ASAP. Completed. Elizabeth Write Greta Movassaghi at the Forest Service about the need to seek alternatives to minimize or mitigate effects of decommissioning the North Channel Creek spawning beaches and the CRAG’s wish to discuss this with the Aquatics Resource Group and the Forest Service early in 2011. Completed. Mark Initiate a non-disclosure agreement and send the feasibility study to Stephen at SHPO (or send to Elizabeth to forward). In process. Elizabeth gave an update. The revised feasibility study has just been finalized and distributed internally. Elizabeth will review and make comments, after which it will be sent to Stephen at SHPO. Elizabeth Send out an Initiation of Consultation letter to the consulting parties that outlines the results of this meeting and a draft of the proposed MOA for 30-day review. In process. This action will follow the previous item and will likely take place this spring and include potential mitigation. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 1/19/11 Notes, Page 2 of 7 Meeting Notes January 19, 2011 / 10:00 a.m. – 2:00 pm / PSE Skagit Center, Burlington Elizabeth and NWAA: Revise APE to include historic district resources for LB FSC and distribute to CRAG with narrative description. Completed. Jan: Share survey results on FS 1106 project with CRAG (2nd phase). In process. Elizabeth: Proceed with curation of collections at the Burke by 9/30/10 with Burke and NWAA. Ongoing. Note: HIT agreement with Burke is being reviewed by PSE Contracts Dept. In process. The PSE Contract department reviewed the Burke contract and raised some questions. Elizabeth will contact Jan for details of the Forest Service contract with the Burke. The Burke does not insure the collections; the government self-insures. There was discussion about the Burke’s responsibility and what impacts could be incurred. Elizabeth will send out the agreement for review by CRAG when completed. NWAA: Prepare collections for curation at Burke by end of September. (Due to FS change in schedule, the collection may not be submitted to the Burke until the end of the year. Completed. All: Discuss best action regarding potential issue with WISAARD access to confidential archaeological information. We can put limitations on who can access Baker documents. This issue was discussed with SHPO. Chris: Create structure of documents record. (This refers to a reference index of documents relating to CRAG indicating the date of the latest version.) Completed. All: Present findings from Treatment Plan collection at a professional conference. If such an opportunity arises, it will need to be reviewed by the CRAG. It was decided to remove this item from the Actions List. UPDATE ON HPMP Jan requested an update on the HPMP. It was submitted to FERC last fall, and we are waiting to hear whether it has been approved. PSE will follow up with FERC shortly if there continues to be no word. BRCC ACTIVITIES No report. PROJECT UPDATES Baker Clubhouse – Elizabeth reported that PCL (the contractor who will be renovating and using the Clubhouse) attended the meeting in December with SHPO and BOLA in which the proposal was reviewed line by line. The report sent out to CRAG was based on comments received. Comments were received from SHPO and the Forest Service. BOLA Architects and PSE are moving ahead with plans. Work has not yet begun. BOLA and PSE will monitor the work. The Concrete Heritage Museum had items stored in the basement of the Clubhouse, and they have been secured. PCL will not use the basement level. If this changes, the items will be moved and securely stored. Determination for this project is that there is no adverse effect based on the agreed-upon proposal. Lower Baker Dam Overtopping Project – CRAG determined at the October meeting with SHPO that there will be an adverse effect to the dam and gatehouse from this project. PSE made changes to the proposal to minimize the effect, and has just sent the revised feasibility report out internally for review. This will be sent BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 1/19/11 Notes, Page 3 of 7 Meeting Notes January 19, 2011 / 10:00 a.m. – 2:00 pm / PSE Skagit Center, Burlington to SHPO with a non-disclosure agreement to confirm the adverse effect. Elizabeth will prepare a draft MOA, which will be sent to CRAG for review. Although SHPO’s position is that if an item is adverse, it can’t be minimized, work has been done to lessen the impact. Mitigation will include HAER and Interpretation. Jan clarified that the CRAG can consult on mitigation per the HPMP. Elizabeth outlined the main components of the MOA. She also commented that there is an opportunity to consider a combined MOA and combined mitigation since there are other projects coming up in the near future, such as the Gulper and the spawning beaches. There was brief discussion about possible mitigation projects, such as an historic documentary. Jan commented on the need to be diligent about historic preservation and expressed her support for the idea of the larger MOA. Lower Baker FSC – Elizabeth will mail the technical report prepared by NWAA this week to CRAG members for 30-day review. No historic properties are affected based as no properties are eligible. Elizabeth requests if someone has a question or needs more information to call her directly rather than wait to send formal comments. Work will start this spring. Archaeological report – Elizabeth distributed copies of the 2010 monitoring report which includes activities through April of 2010. Jan requested hard copies and needs the report in future prior to September 30. This will serve as the base report, and in future only updates will be given. Channel Creek Spawning Beaches Complex – March 8 joint meeting with Aquatics Resources Group A joint meeting will be held on March 8, tentatively scheduled for 11 a.m. at the PSE Snoqualmie Center, to discuss the proposal for decommissioning the spawning beaches and explore options to minimize adverse effect. WebEx and call in options will be available. Let Elizabeth know if you will be attending or have no interest. Larry clarified that documentation counts as mitigation. Heather recommends it as the engineering and design are significant. Some work has already been done. Larry suggested that at some time it would be interesting to do a complete history of this project. and suggested capturing information along the way to prepare. Some work (e.g. Salmon on the River) has been done, but the early information is missing. LUNCH PROJECT UPDATES, continued Stabilization Project – Our proposal for this project has been ready for some time, and March 7 is the projected start date. It was determined that a Corps permit and a Washington Fish & Wildlife HPA are needed. Fish and Wildlife have stated that the proposed work creates a hardening which makes an effect, and so they are requiring mitigation, even though the fish habitat is actually being increased. The decision on mitigation has not yet been made. It is possible that it will be sufficient to place round river rock (salmon rock) on top, even though it will most likely wash away. It could be taken from Spawning Beach 3 with no effect. It is possible that $100,000 of mitigation will be required, in which case CRAG will need to revisit the plan. So far, plans are moving forward. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 1/19/11 Notes, Page 4 of 7 Meeting Notes January 19, 2011 / 10:00 a.m. – 2:00 pm / PSE Skagit Center, Burlington Jan commented that the use of river rock raises concerns for the Forest Service: where might the rock end up? It may not be covered by the existing NEPA. An underlying issue about whether mitigation will be required for every shoreline erosion measure has been raised. There has been a short delay in getting the Corps license. They require that everything in the application be submitted on 8-1/2 x 11, and now have requested larger copies, but there should still be plenty of time. Swim Line – Information about this proposal was sent to CRAG last week. No comments have been received. Elizabeth outlined the project, which is a Recreational Group/Forest Service project they would like to do in conjunction with the stabilization work. The project calls for ecology blocks to be buried. The area has all been surveyed, at least all that is exposed during drawdown. Questions were raised about the size of the ecology blocks, how the excavation is to be done. ACTION: NWAA Provide monitoring during installation of swim line at Horseshoe Cove. ACTION: Elizabeth Get more information on the swim line project, e.g. what size blocks, how excavation will be managed, etc. No Wake Sign – Elizabeth reported that Scott Schuyler had suggested installing a “No Wake” sign in Horseshoe Cove, and that is moving forward. The area has been identified on the new water safety map, and CRAG is asked to determine the appropriate location for the sign. There was some discussion, and a site was selected. Larry raised the question that No Wake is usually associated with approach to the boat launch, but CRAG is also concerned about the shore. What ideas does Recreation have about this? ANNUAL PROJECT LIST Elizabeth presented the list of major capital projects for 2011 and reviewed them. She will send the list out to CRAG members. Larry asked about preconstruction meetings. Elizabeth attends them, and tribal members are always welcome. Elizabeth stated that project managers are aware of HPMP requirements, and additionally, appropriate language is now included in all contracts. In the case of the stabilization project, NWAA will be on site to monitor throughout the project, approximately 10 days. Alder Creek Elk Habitat – Approximately 400 acres at Alder Creek has been purchased for elk habitat. The Terrestrial Resources Group (TRIG) is having it mapped for roads. Elizabeth has asked for early access to check for historical information. There are logging roads and a railroad system at minimum. It has a wetland and a tributary and is located west of Grandy Lake. Elizabeth will send maps to CRAG when they are prepared so that members are familiar with the property by the time TRIG is ready to create their management plan. Low Pools – Elizabeth will take advantage of low pools March 7 – April 11 to survey new places or sites not seen for several years for Treatment Plan work. Chris is preparing a Scope of Work. The time period is weather-dependent and tied to the fish window as well. Elizabeth will arrange for a boat to be available for Lake Shannon, and Chris will have crews available. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 1/19/11 Notes, Page 5 of 7 Meeting Notes January 19, 2011 / 10:00 a.m. – 2:00 pm / PSE Skagit Center, Burlington ACTION: Elizabeth Send Annual Project List to CRAG members. DECISIONS FOR NEXT MEETING: None known EVALUATE MEETING, SET LOCATION AND AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING (February 16, 2011) Evaluate Meeting:  Treats good  Nice to see Larry Do Differently  Need SHPO  Heather wants to come in person Draft Agenda for February 16, 2011 Meeting at Skagit Center, Burlington 10:00-10:30 Review notes / agenda / action items for January 19, 2011 meeting Review recent BRCC meeting activities, licensing updates (Decisions Required at Today’s Meeting: None) 10:30-Noon Project Updates/Discussions  Channel Creek Spawning Beaches Discussion – CRAG goal for Channel Creek Spawning Beaches – preparation for joint meeting with Aquatics Resources Group on March 8 Noon Lunch 12:30 – 1:45 Project Updates/Discussions, continued  Stabilization Project  Discussion – Combined Mitigation Concept 1:45 – 2:00 Decisions for next meeting? Evaluate Meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting (March 16) PARKING LOT  Mitigation for multiple projects  Survey strategy for Alder Creek  Phased consultation for LB FSC WEB EX INFO To join the meeting online ------------------------------------------------------- 1. Go to https:eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeEEeeeeeeeeeeeEEEeeeeeeeeeeeEEeEEEEeEEeeEEEeeEEeEeEeee 2. If requested, enter your name and email address. 3. If a password is required, enter the meeting password: eeeeeee 4. Click "Join". BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 1/19/11 Notes, Page 6 of 7 Meeting Notes January 19, 2011 / 10:00 a.m. – 2:00 pm / PSE Skagit Center, Burlington 5. If the meeting includes a teleconference, follow the instructions that appear on your screen. CONFERENCE INFO To join the meeting ------------------- Dial in from your phone: MeetingPlace Main Number eeeeeeeeeeee Internal Number eeeeeee Toll Free Number eeeeeeeeeeee Meeting ID: 813609 Password: eeeeee BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 1/19/11 Notes, Page 7 of 7  