 Meeting Notes January 20, 2010 / 10:00 am – 2:00 pm / Skagit Center, Web-X, Call Baker River Project License Implementation Cultural Resource Advisory Group Final Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE), (425) 462-3609, elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com. PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Jan Hollenbeck (United States Forest Service), and Candace Wilson (Facilitator, PDSA Consulting). Attending by Phone: Rob Whitlam (Department of Archaeology & Historic Preservation) DECISIONS: None today NEXT MEETING: Jan. 27 – HPMP Discussion (PSE-Bellevue); Feb. 17 – Regular Meeting, Skagit Center 2010 MEETING DATES: March 17, April 21, May 19, June 16, July 21, August 18, September 15, October 20, November 17, December 15 JANUARY 20 AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items for January 6, 2010 meeting 2. Review recent BRCC meeting activities, licensing updates?  BRCC membership contacts, timing of formalizing resource groups, meeting timing  Next steps 3. Decisions Required at Today’s Meeting: None Lunch 4. Project Updates  Next steps 5. HPMP Revision  Check-In on Review Process  Timeline  Next steps 6. Decisions for next meeting? 7. Evaluate Meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting (February 17, 2010) NEW ACTION ITEMS  Elizabeth Email CRAG to see who wants to attend a field trip to LB FSC and set a date. Possible dates: Feb. 12, Feb. 17, Feb. 26.  Elizabeth Send comments on Aesthetics Plan to Jan.  Candace Send out an email reminding CRAG members of their action items to prepare for the HPMP discussion.  Candace: Email membership info to members and ask for updates. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 1/20/10 Notes, Page 1 of 6 Meeting Notes January 20, 2010 / 10:00 am – 2:00 pm / Skagit Center, Web-X, Call ACTION ITEMS FROM THE JANUARY 6 MEETING  Jan/Jessie Rework NFS section of the HPMP (pg. 154)  Jessie Send Tables 4.1 Proposed Actions and 4.2 Excluded License Articles to Jan  Elizabeth Rework Maintenance Guidelines section of the HPMP (pg. 154) to be more specific  Elizabeth Review NHPA for specifics on qualifications/determinations of Cultural resources Coordinator  All Determine placement of CRC/professional archaeologist proviso – should it be introduced at specific locations in the HPMP ore included in the CRC qualifications in section 6?  Jessie Rework 5.3.5 Introduction and “Monitoring Program” to make it more inclusive of all cultural resources.  Elizabeth Investigate holding a 2010 CRAG meeting at Baker Lodge or Scott’s office.  Ron Provide CRAG a copy of the Corps Standard Operating Procedures Appendix D on emergencies  Elizabeth Research whether additional curation is needed for PSE engineered drawings  Elizabeth Send Section 5 of the HPMP to CRAG members PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS  Jan Provide agency letter stating more time needed for comments in the HPMP process  All: Review HPMP Section 1.5 on Confidentiality.  Elizabeth: Consult with Tribes and Forest Service regarding confidentiality.  All: Review HPMP Section 1.5 on Confidentiality.  Elizabeth: Consult with Tribes and Forest Service regarding confidentiality.  All: Determine best action regarding potential issue with WISAARD access to confidential archaeological information.  Elizabeth: Follow up with Forest Service on Protective Options project. In process  Chris: Create structure of documents record. (This refers to a reference index of documents relating to CRAG indicating the date of the latest version.)  Chris: Contact the USACE Lawr Salo as a possible resource for this team. In process.  Kelly: Send Elizabeth some scenarios to use as examples in portraying decision and quorum rules for CRAG over the life of the license. On hold.  Kelly: Provide drawings of three treatment options for next meeting. This is still pending.  Elizabeth: Check to see if 2009 CRAG notes are posted on the website and send link to group. Ongoing.  Elizabeth: Look at curation protocols.  Elizabeth: Draft a description of documentation for CRAG to review, for insertion into the Baker Master Plan, so that it is part of PSE’s process to consider with every project.  Heather: Collect data for a new table for those buildings that have not been evaluated, and include a DOE schedule. (She handed this over to HRA).  Elizabeth: See if the Museum newspaper project can be added to the Master Plan.  All? Present findings from Treatment Plan collection at a professional conference. REVIEW NOTES/AGENDA/ACTION ITEMS: Notes Notes from the January 6 CRAG meeting are awaiting review; approval of the notes was postponed until the next meeting. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 1/20/10 Notes, Page 2 of 6 Meeting Notes January 20, 2010 / 10:00 am – 2:00 pm / Skagit Center, Web-X, Call Agenda The agenda was reviewed. LB FSC Project field trip, protective options, review of the aesthetics plan, and review of erosion control plan were added to the agenda. Elizabeth will add protective options to her PSE Project List. Report on Action Items Action items were postponed to the Jan. 27 CRAG meeting as they pertain to the HPMP discussion. BRCC UPDATE The BRCC has not met for a couple of months; they request updates from the resource groups and forward those out to BRCC members. PROJECT UPDATES 2010 Project List Elizabeth shared a 2010 Project List form she is developing for annual reporting to the CRAG and asked for input from CRAG members. Suggestions were made to add exemption information, license article and map references, Section, Range & Township, survey efforts, etc. Maps to support the list will be helpful. Appendix C of the HPMP (Routine Actions) is being developed and will most likely include a map. There was some discussion of how to define “General Operations & Maintenance (O&M) so that actions with effects don’t slip in. Elizabeth noted that Standards and Guidelines do not generally address interiors. Some hundred-year old Snoqualmie facilities and equipment are covered, but interior of houses is not—this includes Baker River houses. LB FSC Project Field Trip Elizabeth would like to schedule a field trip for CRAG with the engineers and consultants to visit the Lower Baker Floating Surface Collector and review the project. The APE is close to being defined. Most of the project locations have been set: staging, FSC, log boom, anchor points, pier. Elizabeth believes anchors will be about mid-pool, and this can be verified with the engineers. All ground-disturbing activities need to be reviewed by CRAG. Three known ineligible historic properties are within the APE: trestle remains, a historic bridge remnant, a toilet foundation from the 1960’s. The Tribes are glad to have this all moved out of the canyon. Most should be accessible in February, though possibly not the west side of the lake. Jan and Elizabeth checked dates. ACTION: Elizabeth Email CRAG to see who wants to attend a field trip to LB FSC and set a date. Possible dates: Feb. 12, Feb. 17, Feb. 26. Stabilization Project Elizabeth met with PSE engineers on Jan. 19. They will work with Roger Nicols on calculations, site access, etc. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 1/20/10 Notes, Page 3 of 6 Meeting Notes January 20, 2010 / 10:00 am – 2:00 pm / Skagit Center, Web-X, Call Stabilization Project Field Trip Elizabeth will check with Greta at the Forest Service to get her approval and the appropriate process information for scheduling a field trip for CRAG. PSE engineers have requested a meeting with Roger Nicols and Doug Koens, and other consultants at the site. Elizabeth will follow up on this and possibly set up a field trip for the confidential members of CRAG later in the spring. FS 1106 Jan reviewed the report under the Forest Service’s Programmatic Agreement. There are no historic properties, so this will go with the quarterly report. The Forest Service communicated with Larry directly because he responded to the initial scoping letter. This project falls under Forest Service process. LB Power House PSE has reviewed site alternatives and currently plans to build the new power house a little downstream from and adjacent to the existing power house on the same bench that was created for its construction. This plan means they will not need to disturb the buried power house. Elizabeth has asked them to look for the railroad grades when doing radar probes. She believes they were removed, but will need the information for the Adult Fish Trap project. LB Dam Elizabeth received the feasibility study report. Under the LB Dam Safety article in the license, PSE is looking at flood control for the Skagit Valley. They are looking at what needs to be done and there is a potential to affect the LB Dam, which is part of the historic district. They are currently doing feasibility studies on 6 proposals. Elizabeth will follow this and report to CRAG. Jan raised a concern that 60% of the historic district’s contributing elements have been adversely affected. Do we need to take a bigger look? Where are we now in terms of protecting the integrity of this hydroelectric district? Do we need to make some preservation effort? It was decided this discussion can occur when a proposal on the dam is received. HPMP REVISION UPDATE The next meeting of the core group to continue discussion of the HPMP will take place next Wednesday, January 27, at the PSE Bellevue office at 9:30 a.m. ACTION: Candace Send out an email reminding CRAG members of their action items to prepare for the HPMP discussion. REVIEW AESTHETICS PLAN Jan raised questions about the process for review of the Aesthetics Plan, since it is a potential cross-resource issue. Elizabeth made edits and sent them to Pam Garland, who will work with EDAW Consulting. It will be sent out for review according to the Settlement Agreement. This is a document developed by the Recreation Resource Group and does not need to go specifically to CRAG members. Jan is concerned that language is included that delineates that all projects must be reviewed by the Cultural Resource Coordinator for determination as consistent with the HPMP. ACTION: Elizabeth Send comments on Aesthetics Plan to Jan. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 1/20/10 Notes, Page 4 of 6 Meeting Notes January 20, 2010 / 10:00 am – 2:00 pm / Skagit Center, Web-X, Call REVIEW OF EROSION CONTROL PLAN Jan questioned whether the Erosion Control Plan is still needed since other steps are being taken to protect cultural resources. Elizabeth suggested erosion control may still be needed since the stabilization project has been delayed. Work may need to be redone at other sites as well. Bank-cutting and sluffing are the only concerns at present. Original concerns were for sites of deflation and burial. Anything eligible under the Treatment Plan should stay on the list as things can change (e.g. funding). After discussion, it was decided that the plan is still needed for 4 sites, two at Baker Lake and two at Shannon Lake, including 252 and 253. Jan will communicate this to Greta. FTP SITE Jan asked about the FTP site. Elizabeth understands it is working now, but she is unable to upload herself and is working with PSE on this. 2010 MEETING SCHEDULE Regular meeting time has been changed to 10 a.m. for 2010. A concern was raised about the low turnout at the meetings and whether meetings could take place at a more convenient site for those who attend. The next regular meeting is schedule for February 17 unless it becomes the date of the field trip. EVALUATE MEETING, SET LOCATION AND AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING (February 17, 2010) Evaluate Meeting:  Abundant lunches  Great discussion Do Differently  More people  Members need to let us know if they can’t come The agenda for the next meeting (Feb. 17 unless that is a field trip date or March 17). ACTION: Candace: Email membership info to members and ask for updates. Draft Agenda for January27, 2010 Meeting (HPMP Discussion) 1. Review notes/agenda/action items 2. HPMP Revision Update  Check-In on Review Process & Timeline  Discussion of Section 5  Revisit pg. 154: NFS Lands  Revisit pg. 154: Actions under Maintenance Guidelines and Archaeological Treatment Plan  Revisit Sections 5.3.2 Para. 2 re CRC qualification/professional archaeologist  Revisit 5.3.5 Intro & Monitoring Program  Review Monitoring form and revisit 5.3.5 “Archaeological Sites” when revised.  Review 6/3 Reporting  Review Curation Plan BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 1/20/10 Notes, Page 5 of 6 Meeting Notes January 20, 2010 / 10:00 am – 2:00 pm / Skagit Center, Web-X, Call  Further Discussion of Unresolved areas listed in Comments Log  Other issues?  Next Steps LUNCH 3. Decisions? 4. Evaluate meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting? Draft Agenda for February 17, 2010 Meeting: 1. Review notes/agenda/action items for January 6, January 20, and January 27, 2010 meetings 2. Review recent BRCC meeting activities, licensing updates?  BRCC membership contacts, timing of formalizing resource groups, meeting timing  Next steps 3. Decisions Required at Today’s Meeting: None Lunch 4. Project Updates  2010 Project List Report  Next steps 5. HPMP Revision  Check-In on Review Process  Timeline  Next steps 6. Decisions for next meeting? 7. Erosion Plan Update 8. Review meeting norms and membership list 9. Evaluate Meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting (February 17, 2010) BREAK 10. Protective Options  Review Drawings  Next Steps BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Cultural Resource Advisory Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 1/20/10 Notes, Page 6 of 6  